
Chapter 1 
1Part 1 
Introduction 
ICT in primary and post-primary education in Ireland 
Chapter 1 
1Part 1 
Introduction 

ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
1.1 Introduction 
Information and communications technology (ICT) is an accepted element in all our lives and has a 
central role to play in education. Since the appearance of the first Government policy on ICT in 
education in 1997, a substantial investment has been made in ICT facilities and training in Irish 
schools. In Ireland, as in other countries, the debate about ICT in education concentrates on the 
potential impact of ICT on teaching and learning and on the measures that need to be adopted to 
ensure that the potential of ICT to enrich students’ learning experience is realised. 

This Inspectorate report presents the findings of a major evaluation of the impact of ICT on teaching 
and learning in both primary and post-primary schools in Ireland. The evaluation set out to establish 
the extent to which ICT was used in the schools at both levels and, more importantly, to assess the 
impact ICT had on teaching and learning, including the ways in which ICT is used to facilitate the 
learning of students with special educational needs. The views of principals and teachers about their 
own ICT skills, and their opinions about the impact and future role of ICT in education, were sought 
during the evaluation. 

This chapter examines the background to the provision of ICT in Irish schools. It first seeks to place 
the development of ICT in education in the wider social and economic context. The policy context 
for the development of ICT in schools is then considered. The findings of the census of ICT 

2 



ICT in primary and post-primary education Chapter 1 
infrastructure (2005) carried out by the National Centre for Technology in Education (NCTE) are then 
reviewed. 

1.2 Background 
As the OECD has pointed out, ICT is now ubiquitous in the modern world (OECD, 2001). The OECD 
has reported that, in the twenty-one OECD countries for which data was available, employment in 
the ICT industry represented about 6.6% of total business employment (OECD, 2003). This 
translated into more than 16 million people employed in the industry. The European Union 
accounted for more than a third of this figure. 

The same OECD report noted that average employment growth in the ICT industry over the 
previous five years had been more than 4.3% annually, a figure that was more than three times that 
of business in general. A more recent and even more dramatic indicator of the growth in ICT, 
published by the OECD in 2006, shows an increase in broadband penetration of 33% in the OECD 
between June 2005 and June 2006 (OECD, 2006b). Similar statistics could be quoted for numerous 
indicators of the growth in ICT around the world. Such statistics provide irrefutable proof of the 
extent to which ICT is becoming an increasingly integral part of modern society, with ICT 
competence becoming increasingly important for effective participation in social and economic 
activity. 

In Ireland, no less than in other OECD countries, the impact of ICT on business and society generally 
has increased dramatically in recent years. In many respects Ireland has been a leader in the 
adoption of the technology and in capitalising on its potential to develop our economy. For 
example, in 2003 Ireland was the leading exporter of computer software, while, according to 
Eurostat, a third of all personal computers sold in Europe are manufactured in Ireland2. However, not 
all the indicators of progress towards a knowledge economy are as positive. The 2006 OECD report 
referred to above showed that Ireland was 24th out of 30 OECD countries in broadband 
penetration. It is clear that, at least in certain areas, Ireland still has some way to go to be a leader in 
the field of ICT. 

The increasing permeation of ICT in all aspects of modern life has led to the concept of a 
“knowledge-based society,” one aspect of which is the knowledge-based economy3. It is now 
widely accepted that the future prosperity of the country is predicated on our ability to develop a 
knowledge-based economy. Arising from the Lisbon agenda4, the development of such an economy 
is the stated aim of the Government. The Technology Foresight Reports recommended that the 
Government establish a major fund to develop Ireland as a centre for world-class research excellence 
in ICT and biotechnology (Irish Council for Science Technology and Innovation, 1999). As part of its 

2 Statistical Office of the European Communities. 
3 It [a knowledge-based economy] may be defined as an economy in which the generation and the exploitation of knowledge has 

come to play the predominant part in the creation of wealth. (Accenture, 2004) 
4 

The European Council of Heads of State and Governments held in Lisbon in 2000 set as a strategic goal that the European Union 
should become the world’s most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy by 2010. The programme of reforms intended 
to implement this goal is referred to as the Lisbon Agenda or the Lisbon Process. 

3 



ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
response, the Government initiated the Technology Foresight Fund of more than €700 million in 
2000. Science Foundation Ireland (SFI) was created to administer this fund, first as a sub-group 
within Forfás5 and subsequently on a statutory basis. In its Strategy for Science, Technology and 
Innovation, 2006–2013, published in June 2006 (p.8), the Government committed itself to building 
on the achievements of SFI over the previous six years and reiterated its vision for the development 
of Ireland as a knowledge-based economy (Department of Enterprise Trade and Employment, 2006). 

Ireland by 2013 will be internationally renowned for the excellence of its research, and will be to the 
forefront in generating and using new knowledge for economic and social progress, within an innovation 
driven culture. 

This commitment was reiterated in the current social partnership agreement, Towards 2016 
(Department of the Taoiseach, 2006). In the section on education and training (p.31), one of the 
specific short-term commitments within the first phase is that “all children will have the opportunity 
to become ICT literate by completion of second level.” This commitment to the development of ICT 
underlines an appreciation of the fundamental role played by ICT in a knowledge-based economy. 

The critical sector which underpins and enables the transition to a knowledge-based economy is the ICT 
sector which provides the ability to create, store and distribute knowledge more cheaply than ever in 
human history. The ICT sector essentially enables the existence and growth of the knowledge-based 
economy (Accenture, 2004). 

The world of education has not been immune to the development of ICT. As Michael Kompf (2005), 
in a review of a number of books on the subject, notes, “each author assumes ICT as a permanent 
feature in the landscape of teaching and learning”. The “ICT and education” page of the SURF6 
web site takes this a step further when it says that 

It is no longer possible nowadays to conceive of education without information and communications 
technology (ICT). One can go even further by pointing out that education is increasingly being defined by 
ICT. 

Much has been achieved in recent years in developing the ICT infrastructure in schools. This 
infrastructural development has required significant levels of investment, primarily by the State but 
also by individual schools and institutions. Given the level of investment of both time and finance, as 
described in this report, the need for a thorough evaluation of the impact of ICT in schools was 
clear. 

As pointed out by the OECD (2001) and others, there are three main rationales for promoting the 
use of ICT in schools, namely the economic, the social, and the pedagogical. These, of course, are 
not mutually exclusive. The first two derive directly from the proliferation of ICT in the modern 
world, referred to earlier. As described above, the economic imperative for promoting ICT in schools 
is well recognised in Ireland, as it is in other developed countries. The National Competitiveness 

5 Forfás is the national policy and advisory board for enterprise, trade, science, technology, and innovation. It operates under the 
auspices of the Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment. 

6 

SURF is the Dutch higher education and research partnership organisation for network services and for information and 
communications technology. 

4 



ICT in primary and post-primary education Chapter 1 
Council7, in its Annual Competitiveness Report for 2006, comments that “better use of ICT has 
been identified as one of the key factors required to improve Ireland’s productivity performance.” 
The report went on to point out that, while Ireland’s expenditure per capita on ICT was slightly 
above the EU 15 average, Ireland ranked ninth of the EU 15 countries in expenditure per capita on 
ICT. 

While funding for research has increased dramatically in recent years, the Expert Group on Future 
Skills Needs (EGFSN) continues to warn of shortfalls in the output of graduates in ICT. A submission 
to the Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment in October 2005 by the EGFSN and Forfás 
notes that “existing EGFSN forecasts suggest that there will be significant shortages of graduates 
with ICT backgrounds in the period up to 2010” (Forfás, 2005). 

Though ICT is a vital sector of the economy, requiring highly skilled professionals, it nevertheless 
represents only a relatively small fraction of total employment. However, in the knowledge economy, 
as it is now and more so as it will be in the future, ICT competence is a prerequisite for employees in 
virtually every area. Furthermore, the need for a facility with ICT is not confined to the work 
environment but increasingly permeates all aspects of everyday life, including home and leisure. The 
social imperative for promoting ICT in schools, therefore, is clear: if students are to be prepared to 
lead fulfilled and productive lives in a knowledge-based society they should be ICT-competent on 
leaving the school system. 

The pedagogical rationale for promoting ICT in schools is concerned with the use of ICT in teaching 
and learning. It is intimately related, therefore, to the economic and social rationales, but ICT also 
has additional application in the teaching and learning process. It provides teachers with a range of 
new tools to facilitate traditional pedagogies; it also and perhaps more importantly, presents the 
teacher with the potential to develop new teaching methods. For the student growing up in a 
culture of all-pervasive technology, ICT provides new, and more exciting and relevant, learning 
opportunities. 

In 2002 a report by the Information Society Commission (ISC) noted that, compared with major 
competitors, Ireland lagged some distance in the application of ICT in education (Information 
Society Commission, 2002).8 The report recommended that basic ICT skills should, as far as possible, 
become a core component of mainstream education. The ISC made a number of recommendations 
to the Government, including: 
• priority for capital investment in ICT in schools 
• a commitment to establishing broadband connectivity for schools and other centres of learning 
• provision of technical support for the education system 
• integration of ICT in the curriculum 
• a review of ICT in teacher education, both pre-service and in-service. 

7 The National Competitiveness Council was established in 1997 as a social partnership body and reports to the Taoiseach on 
competitiveness issues facing the economy. 

8 

The Information Society Commission was an independent advisory body to the Government, reporting directly to the Taoiseach. The 
last commission served from November 2001 to December 2004. 

5 



ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
Developing an education system responsive to the demands of a knowledge-based society presents 
challenges for all the participants in education. Not the least of these challenges is the need for 
significant additional funding to provide the necessary infrastructure to facilitate the development of 
ICT in the classroom. The technical support and maintenance of this infrastructure, when it exists, is 
also a challenge and is an issue for many schools (as discussed in later chapters of this report). As 
noted above, ICT provides teachers with opportunities to develop new teaching methods. However, 
to realise the potential of ICT to expand their methodological repertoire, most teachers require 
continuing professional development and support in the use of the relevant technologies. Teachers 
in specific subject areas also require support in responding to the demands presented by the 
inclusion of ICT in revised syllabuses. At the school level the integration of ICT in teaching and 
learning puts additional demands on timetabling as schools expand their curriculum to include 
dedicated ICT lessons, particularly at the post-primary level, while ensuring equitable access to ICT 
facilities for students in the context of subject-specific requirements. 

1.3 ICT policy and investment in education 
The importance of developing ICT in education and responding to the challenges outlined in the 
previous section has been recognised by the Government for more than a decade. The White Paper 
on education Charting Our Education Future (1995) stated as one of the objectives of the junior 
cycle curriculum that “all students . . . will have achieved . . . competence and understanding in 
practical skills, including computer literacy and information technology.” In 1997 the Government 
published its first policy document on ICT in education, entitled Schools IT 2000. The publication of 
this policy document led in 1998 to the introduction of the ICT in Schools Initiative. This initiative 
established the basis for the development of ICT in the education system. 

1.3.1 Policy for ICT in education 
In 1998 the National Centre for Technology in Education (NCTE) was established, with a brief to 
implement the Schools IT 2000 initiative. The NCTE’s brief also included the development of ICT 
policy proposals and the provision of ICT policy advice to the Department of Education and Science. 

The Schools IT 2000 initiative had three major strands: 
• the Technology Integration Initiative 
• the Teaching Skills Initiative 
• the Schools Support Initiative, including 

—the Schools Integration Project (SIP) 

—Scoilnet. 

The role of ICT in supporting children with special educational needs was a feature of all the IT 2000 
initiatives. 

6 



ICT in primary and post-primary education Chapter 1 ICT in primary and post-primary education Chapter 1 
The Technology Integration Initiative was designed to support schools in developing their ICT 
infrastructure. Schools received grants for the purchase of computer hardware, and those schools 
that did not already have an internet connection were assisted in getting on line. (See section 1.3.3.) 
The aim of the Technology Integration Initiative was to have at least 60,000 computers in schools by 
the end of 2001. In the following year the NCTE census reported that there were some 84,000 
computers in Irish schools. 

The Teaching Skills Initiative recognised that there was little point in putting computers in schools 
unless teachers were trained in their use. This initiative provided for teacher training in three distinct 
areas, namely ICT skills and awareness, professional skills development in ICT, and pedagogical skills 
development. 

The Schools Integration Project dealt with whole-school development and investigated a range of 
teaching and learning topics with regard to ICT integration. Approximately ninety pilot projects were 
established in a number of “lead” schools, which worked in partnership with education centres, 
businesses, industry, third-level institutions, and the community. Most of the individual projects 
implemented as part of the SIP concluded in 2001 and 2002, and the remainder were completed in 
2004. 

The Scoilnet initiative is responsible for the promotion and use of the internet and ICT in education. 
The main emphasis of this initiative is on the development of the Scoilnet web site (www.scoilnet.ie) 

7 



ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
as a resource for teachers and students. Resource materials for the web site are reviewed by a panel 
of subject experts, thus ensuring their appropriateness for use in Irish classrooms. The Scoilnet web 
site is the Department of Education and Science’s official portal for Irish education. The Scoilnet 
initiative is also responsible for the development and maintenance of the NCTE web site, which 
provides comprehensive advice and support on all aspects of ICT in education as well as serving as a 
notice-board for the NCTE’s activities. 

Schools IT 2000 envisaged that ICT advisors would be appointed in education centres to support the 
work of the NCTE by providing leadership, training and support, including on-line support, at the 
regional level and by providing regular feedback on progress and issues arising. Ultimately some 
twenty ICT advisors (later increased to twenty-one)—one in each of the full-time education 
centres—were appointed. The main role of these advisors may be summarised as follows: 
• to advise and support teachers in their region in integrating ICT in their teaching and in their 

students’ learning 
• to build a knowledge base on all matters relating to the use of ICT in their local schools. 

A report on the implementation of Schools IT 2000 published in 2001 revealed a high level of 
satisfaction with the initiatives implemented under IT 2000 (National Policy Advisory and 
Development Committee)9. The report, however, identified three issues of concern: 
• the need for more training for teachers 
• the need for more funding (equipment and computers, maintenance, support) 
• the need for more support (technical support, encouragement to use ICT). 

Based on its findings, the committee made recommendations covering a range of areas, including 
policy, funding, the professional development of teachers, pre-service teacher education, 
infrastructure, and technical support. 

In 2001 the Government launched its second policy document on ICT in education, A Blueprint for 
the Future of ICT in Irish Education. This was a three-year strategic plan designed to support the 
continuation of the main initiatives begun under IT 2000 and to build on the progress achieved 
under that plan. The main objectives of the Blueprint policy were to: 
• expand ICT capital provision to schools 
• increase access to, and the use of, internet technologies 
• further integrate ICT in teaching and learning 
• enhance professional development opportunities for teachers. 

While support for children with special educational needs was a feature of all earlier initiatives under 
IT 2000, the Blueprint gave priority to provision for these students. A further focus of the Blueprint 
was planning for ICT at the school level. Arising from this focus, the NCTE in 2002 published a 
planning pack entitled ICT Planning and Advice for Schools. This pack was designed to facilitate 

9 

The National Policy Advisory and Development Committee (NPADC) was set up in 1998 under Schools IT 2000 to assist the NCTE in 
its work. The committee included representation from the education and social partners. 

8 



ICT in primary and post-primary education Chapter 1 
schools in developing ICT plans to meet the infrastructural and other ICT-related needs of their 
individual schools. 

1.3.2 ICT in the curriculum 
The revised Primary School Curriculum was launched in 1999. The introduction to the curriculum 
states: 

Technological skills are increasingly important for advancement in education, work, and leisure. The 
curriculum integrates ICT into the teaching and learning process and provides children with opportunities 
to use modern technology to enhance their learning in all subjects (Department of Education and 
Science, 1999, p. 29). 

As this statement suggests, ICT in the primary curriculum is seen primarily as a tool for facilitating 
teaching and learning throughout the curriculum, rather than as a subject in its own right. The 
teacher guidelines that accompany the curriculum document for each area provide detailed 
suggestions on how ICT can be used to best effect in the teaching and learning of the particular 
subject. Thus, for example, the teacher guidelines for English open the section on ICT with the 
statement: 

Computers and other items of information and communication technologies enrich the teaching and 
learning of language considerably. The following are among some of the ways in which they may be 
used. 

The guidelines then go on to list some eight ways in which ICT might be used, from CD-based 
reference materials to the internet and e-mail. In 2004 the National Council for Curriculum and 
Assessment (NCCA) completed a comprehensive set of guidelines for teachers on the use of ICT 
(National Council for Curriculum and Assessment, 2004a). These guidelines were designed to 
complement the teacher guidelines provided with the different subjects in the Primary School 
Curriculum while reflecting developments in ICT since the launch of the curriculum five years earlier. 
In a discussion document published in the same year the NCCA set out seven key principles for 
guiding learners’ use of ICT (National Council for Curriculum and Assessment, 2004b, pp. 31-34), 
which adds value to the curriculum when it facilitates: 
• students’ active involvement in their own learning 
• the development of students’ higher-order thinking skills 
• students’ learning in authentic environments 
• students’ interest and engagement in learning 
• differentiated learning for all students 
• collaborative learning 
• assessment of and for learning. 

At the post-primary level, computers were first introduced as a course of study to the curriculum in 
1980, when an optional computer studies module was included in the Leaving Certificate 

9 



ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
Mathematics syllabus. Schools are required to develop their own syllabus for this option within 
broad parameters laid down by the DES (Department of Education and Science, 2006). The module 
is not examinable, but students who complete it satisfactorily are issued with a certificate by the 
DES. While only minor modifications have been made to the published course parameters since its 
introduction in 1980, anecdotal evidence suggests that the emphasis in those schools that continue 
to provide the module has shifted significantly towards the development of skills in such areas as 
word-processing and spreadsheets. 

When the Leaving Certificate computer studies module was introduced in 1980 it was intended that 
this would be a first step in the development of computer studies in the post-primary curriculum. In 
1985 a computer studies course was introduced in the junior cycle. Unlike the senior-cycle module, 
no certification is provided for those who complete this course. The national survey of school 
principals reported that only 13% of them were providing this course. (See chapter 6.) 

Neither of the computer studies courses has been revised since their introduction, nor has there 
been any further development of computer studies courses, as such, as part of the curriculum in 
either the junior or the senior cycle. However, in the LCA programme there are two courses in 
information and communications technology. All students in the programme must complete a two-
module course entitled Introduction to Information and Communications. In addition they may 
choose, as one of their vocational specialisms, a four-module course in information and 
communications technology. Like all the vocational specialisms, this latter course is assessed in a 
written examination at the end of year 2. In 2007 this examination was taken by some 1,155 
candidates, or 38% of the Leaving Certificate examination candidates who had followed the LCA 
programme. 

While the computer studies modules introduced in the 1980s were seen as independent subjects, 
with an emphasis on computer programming, more recent trends have concentrated on the cross-
curricular applications of ICT. Many of the revised syllabuses introduced in recent years have 
included references to the relevant applications of ICT in the subject area as well as to the more 
general applications of ICT to teaching and learning. For example, the teacher guidelines that 
accompany the revised Junior Certificate Science syllabus, introduced in 2003, have a section on 
“Using ICT in the teaching and learning of Science.” At the Leaving Certificate level one of the 
stated aims of the Geography syllabus, introduced in 2004, is “to encourage the use of information 
and communication technology in the teaching and learning of Geography.” This syllabus also 
contains several other references to specific uses of ICT in the teaching and learning of the subject. 
In the LCVP, in addition to the use of ICT in specific subject areas, students are required to use ICT in 
the preparation and presentation of their portfolios. In Transition Year, many schools provide courses 
in ICT-related areas; these include such courses as “Computer Science”, “Computer Applications” 
and “Information Technology”. 

10 



ICT in primary and post-primary education Chapter 1 
As part of its work on the place of ICT in the post-primary curriculum, the National Council for 
Curriculum and Assessment commissioned research in the area. This resulted in two research reports 
being presented to the NCCA by the University of Limerick. The first study found that there was 
overwhelming support from both the education system and industry for the introduction of a 
computer-based subject to the Established Leaving Certificate programme (O'Doherty et al., 2000). 
The primary reason put forward by respondents for introducing such a subject was the promotion of 
“computer literacy.” The second study investigated the preferred nature of an ICT-related subject in 
more depth (O'Doherty, et al., 2001). This study reported general agreement on the need to 
introduce provision for “computer literacy” for all students as the first priority. However, there was 
no agreement on how best this might be achieved. The findings of the University of Limerick study 
were discussed at length by NCCA committees. The principal reasons for not proceeding with the 
development of a discrete Leaving Certificate subject were concerned with the inequalities likely to 
emanate from such a decision. Committees agreed that equity of access for all students would be 
compromised, as a discrete subject would, of necessity, be optional. 

The NCCA has now adopted a twin-track approach to promoting ICT in the curriculum. Firstly, it 
aims to facilitate the development of students’ competence in using ICT through its inclusion in 
revised syllabuses and in teacher guidelines. For example, ICT features significantly in the revised 
Leaving Certificate Design and Communications Graphics syllabus and also in its assessment. It also 
arises as a focus of learning in the core of the new LC Technology syllabus. Secondly, the NCCA 
aims to promote ICT as a resource for teaching and learning throughout the curriculum. It is now 
developing a “Framework for ICT in Curriculum and Assessment” for primary schools and for the 
junior cycle of post-primary schools. The ICT framework is not designed as a course in ICT but 
instead is intended to be a cross-curricular support for schools and teachers in developing their 
students’ competence in ICT. It is presented in four inter-related areas of learning, encompassing 
such attributes as basic knowledge and skills, communication, collaboration, and critical thinking 
and creativity. The framework is at present being tested in a number of schools, with resources and 
training being provided. It is hoped to have the framework and support materials ready for use in 
schools in September 2008. 

1.3.3 Investment in ICT in education 
Since the introduction of the ICT in Schools Initiative in 1998 the Government has made a 
substantial investment in the integration of ICT in teaching and learning. As manifested in the NCTE 
census described later in this chapter, this investment has resulted in significant progress in the 
development of ICT infrastructure in schools. 

Each of the policy initiatives described in the previous section was supported by substantial funding. 
The details of this funding are summarised in table 1.1. 

11 



ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
Table 1.1: Funding of ICT in education policy initiatives 

Initiative Year begun Funding 
Schools IT 2000: A Policy Framework for the New Millennium 1998 €52 million 
Blueprint for the Future of ICT in Irish Schools 2001 €78 million 
Networking Schools 2004 €23 million10 
Schools Broadband Programme 2005 €30 million11 

From the 2005/06 school year schools are being provided with broadband internet access as part of 
a joint project between the Government and the Telecommunications and Internet Federation of the 
Irish Business and Employers' Confederation. The local schools connectivity is being provided by 
means of a Schools National Broadband Network. This network and the support services to schools 
are managed by the National Centre for Technology in Education and supported by HEAnet. The 
total costs of the Schools Broadband Programme, including the initial set-up and continuing costs to 
June 2008, are estimated to amount to approximately €30 million. 

1.4 ICT infrastructure census in schools (2005) 
Beginning in 1998, the NCTE conducted a number of censuses of ICT infrastructure in schools. The 
most recent of these, the fourth since 1998, was carried out in May and June 2005. The previous 
census was carried out in 2002. The report of the 2005 census gives a valuable insight into the 
development of the ICT infrastructure in schools at both primary and post-primary level (Shiel & 
O’Flaherty, 2006). In so doing it presents an overview of the results of Government investment in 
ICT while at the same time providing an indication of the need for further investment in the future. 
The census report provides a comprehensive overview of the ICT infrastructure in schools. The 
remainder of this section gives a summary of the salient features of the report. 

1.4.1 Computers in schools 
The NCTE census (2005) shows that since the previous census (2002) there was an increase of 
approximately 15% in the number of computers in schools. Allowing for schools that did not 
respond to the census, the total number of working computers in schools was estimated to be 
97,709. These were approximately equally divided between primary and post-primary schools. 
However, as there are almost four-and-a-half times as many primary schools as post-primary schools, 
the number of computers per school is correspondingly lower at primary level. 

The census also collected data on the location of computers in schools. In primary schools and 
special schools approximately half the computers are in general classrooms. In post-primary schools 
only 4% of computers are in general classrooms; in those schools almost 60% of computers are in 

10 Expenditure to August 2007. 
11 Estimated cost of set-up and continuing costs to June 2008. 

12 



ICT in primary and post-primary education Chapter 1 
computer rooms. Computers at post-primary level were also found in a range of specialist rooms, 
such as science laboratories and technology rooms. The low penetration of computers in general 
classrooms at post-primary level was commented on in the evaluation reports provided by 
inspectors. (This is discussed in chapter 6.) 

Rather than the number of computers per school, a more appropriate indicator of the penetration 
of the technology in schools is the student-computer ratio (SCR).12 The SCR in 2005 for the three 
school sectors – primary, post-primary, and special schools – is shown in table 1.2. The table also 
shows the corresponding figures from the previous two censuses, in 2002 and 2000. It is clear from 
table 1.2 that there has been a significant improvement in the SCR over the past five years, 
particularly at primary level. At post-primary level the improvement is less marked, though still 
significant. 

Table 1.2: Student-computer ratio (SCR) in each school sector in given years 

Primary Post-primary Special 
2005 

9.1 

7.0 

3.1 

2002 

11.3 

7.4 

3.8 

2000 

16.3 

10.9 

5.7 

While the improvement in the SCR is welcome, the ratio is still substantially below international 
standards. For example, in 2003 the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD) Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) gathered data on the numbers of 
computers in schools.13 At that time the OECD calculated a SCR for post-primary schools in Ireland 
of 9:1. This compared with an OECD average of 6:1. The SCR for the United States was 3:1, while 
for a number of other countries, including Hungary and (South) Korea, it was 4:1. As can be seen 
from table 1.2, the SCR at post-primary level in Ireland was estimated to be 7:1 in 2005. However, 
this is still approximately twice what it was two years earlier in the other countries mentioned, and it 
is likely that those countries will also have shown improvements in the interim. 

As noted above, the stock of working computers in schools has increased significantly in recent 
years. However, this technology is changing rapidly, and what was considered “state of the art” in 
2000 is now of limited value for running modern software. The NCTE report shows that in primary 
schools almost 29% of computers are more than six years old. The corresponding figures for post-
primary and special schools are 19% and 21%, respectively. While these computers may be 
adequate for basic tasks, such as word-processing, they are not capable of running much modern 
software, and as computers age they become prone to technical problems. 

12 The student-computer ratio (SCR) is the number of students enrolled in a school divided by the number of computers in the school. 
See note 19 (chapter 2) for further details. 

13 PISA is administered to fifteen-year-old pupils, and therefore the data refers to post-primary schools. 

13 



ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
1.4.2 Other ICT equipment in schools 
The NCTE census gathered data on other aspects of schools’ ICT infrastructure as well as computers. 
The most commonly found ICT equipment after the computer was a scanner. This equipment was 
found in more than 80% of schools across all sectors, with close to 90% of post-primary schools 
reporting having a scanner. The next most commonly found items of equipment across all sectors 
were printers and digital (still) cameras. While printers were commonly found across all sectors laser 
printers were much more common in post-primary schools, with almost 90% of those schools 
having a laser printer, compared with 38% of primary schools. 

Post-primary schools were also better equipped in a number of other areas. Not surprisingly, very 
few primary or special schools had a data-logger, while almost half the post-primary schools had this 
equipment. Perhaps more notable is the discrepancy in the availability of data projectors, particularly 
fixed data projectors, as illustrated in table 1.3. It is also worth noting the low penetration of 
interactive whiteboards. Only 5% of post-primary schools had an interactive whiteboard, while the 
corresponding figures for special schools and primary schools were 3% and 2%, respectively. 

Table 1.3: Proportion of schools having at least one fixed and one mobile data projector 

Primary schools Post-primary schools Special schools 
Mobile data projector 31% 78% 28% 
Fixed data projector 6% 51% 5% 

14 



ICT in primary and post-primary education Chapter 1 
In relation to special-needs provision, the report shows that, outside of the special schools, there is 
relatively little provision of assistive technology devices. For example, “other computer control 
devices (e.g. touch-screens, alternative mice and keyboards)” were reported in only 13% of schools 
at both primary and post-primary level, compared with 55% of special schools. That such devices 
are more commonly found in special schools is not, of course, a surprise. 

While the NCTE report does show a low penetration of some ICTs relative to other countries, as 
discussed above, it also shows that, in relation to at least some of the technologies, there have been 
significant improvements since 2002. For example, the proportion of primary schools that have at 
least one data projector, either fixed or mobile, more than doubled, from 16.5% in 2002 to 36.4% 
in 2005. A similar increase was reported in special schools: from 13.3% in 2002 to 30.4% in 2005. 
The increase in post-primary schools was much less marked, primarily because most of these schools 
(84%) already had a data projector in 2002. In 2005 some 93% of post-primary schools had a least 
one data projector. 

In contrast to the increasing prevalence of data projectors the change in the adoption of interactive 
whiteboards has been very slow. This technology was reported in about 2% of primary schools and 
5% of post-primary schools in both 2002 and 2005. By contrast, a survey by the Department for 
Education and Skills in England in 2004 estimated that 63% of primary schools had interactive 
whiteboards, while the corresponding figure in secondary schools was 92%. 

1.4.3 Expenditure on ICT and technical support 
As referred to earlier in this chapter, the DES has provided financial support to schools for 
developing their infrastructure. The NCTE census sought to establish the level of expenditure by 
schools in addition to grants received from the Department. The response rate to the questions 
relating to expenditure by schools was relatively low, with the proportion of non-respondents 
ranging from 20% to 45%. As the report suggests, data on schools’ expenditure must therefore be 
interpreted with caution. 

For schools that did respond to the relevant question, the average additional expenditure on ICT in 
the previous full financial year was €2,129 per school for primary schools, €11,583 for post-primary 
schools, and €5,679 for special schools. 

In relation to technical support, the average amount spent by responding schools was €741 for 
primary schools, €3,765 for post-primary schools, and €1,239 for special schools. As the report 
notes, approximately one-third of spending on ICTs was allocated to technical support at primary 
and post-primary level and about one-fifth in special schools. 

15 



ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
1.4.4 Other areas covered in the census 
Other areas examined in the NCTE census included networking, ICT planning, the professional 
development of staff members, the certification of students, technical support and maintenance, 
and use of the internet. 

1.5 Summary 
That ICT should be an integral part of the education system is no longer a matter for debate. 
Students must be provided with the opportunity to develop the competence required to equip them 
for life in a knowledge-based society, while teachers cannot afford to ignore the potential of ICT for 
enhancing teaching and learning in their classrooms. Yet achieving an appropriate level of 
integration of ICT in teaching and learning presents a number of challenges. These range from the 
provision of the necessary physical resources to issues of curriculum development and assessment 
and the professional development of teachers. The remainder of this report describes the current 
stage of development of ICT in primary and post-primary schools. It presents examples of good 
practice as well as areas of concern and provides a series of recommendations for policy-makers and 
schools that, if implemented, would serve to enhance the learning experience of the young people 
in our schools. 

16 



