
ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools 
Chapter 4 
69ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools 
Chapter 4 
69

ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
4.1 Introduction 
This chapter is concerned with ICT planning in schools. It begins by reviewing the planning process 
in schools and then takes a close look at the management and co-ordination arrangements that 
prevail in schools with regard to ICT provision. In this context, reference is made to the work of ICT 
steering committees and ICT co-ordinators. The chapter then looks at the ICT plan or, more 
specifically, how such plans are developed and what they contain. The acceptable-use policy (AUP) is 
another important aspect of ICT planning, and this is also examined. The chapter also considers the 
implementation of ICT planning in schools, particularly with regard to teachers’ access to, and take-
up of, ICT professional development training, the extent of usage by individual teachers of ICT for 
lesson-planning purposes, and the level of planning conducted for the actual use of ICT in teaching. 
The chapter concludes by looking at schools’ strategic planning for the development of ICT from the 
viewpoint of principals and teachers. 

4.2 The planning process 
The Schools IT 2000 initiative (referred to in chapter 1) was in many ways the catalyst for the 
development of ICT planning by schools. Through a variety of methods, the initiative sought to 
provide schools with support that would assist them in their ICT planning and in other areas of 
technology integration and skills development. The model of school planning encouraged under this 
initiative was one that integrated regular monitoring and periodic and systematic review. The 
initiative also required schools to adopt an ICT plan in order to attract funding. 

70 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
In 2002 the NCTE issued an ICT planning and advice pack to all schools. The pack provided 
information and advice to help schools in preparing and implementing their ICT plan. The pack also 
offered schools a mechanism for the self-review of their ICT status. It also helped them to target their 
ICT funding more strategically. 

The pack advised schools to follow six steps in developing their ICT plan: 

(a) Consider what the educational objectives and priorities of the school ICT plan should be. In 
particular, the plan should emphasise the effective use of ICT in teaching and learning situations, 
rather than concentrating exclusively on the acquisition of equipment or ICT skills. 
(b) Convene an ICT steering committee to manage the development and implementation of the 
plan and to make the planning process fully inclusive. 
(c) Conduct an audit of the school’s resources to determine the level of ICT provision and identify 
the extent to which the provision is meeting the needs of teachers and students. 
(d) Consider the following five areas as a framework for the plan: ICT management and planning, 
ICT and the curriculum, staff members’ professional development, school’s ICT culture, and ICT 
resources and infrastructure. 
(e) Consider budgetary matters associated with the implementation of the plan. When preparing 
the budget, ensure that provision is made for purchasing, developing and maintaining hardware, 
peripherals, networks, and software. 
(f) Ensure that the school has an ICT co-ordinator whose role is clearly defined, particularly with 
regard to the continuing implementation of the plan. 
In general, it would appear from this evaluation that the support documents made available by 
agencies and services such as the NCTE, the School Development Planning Support (SDPS) service at 
primary level and the School Development Planning Initiative (SDPI) at post-primary level, coupled 
most likely with a combination of other influencing factors,43 have had a positive impact on the level 
of ICT planning in schools. An analysis of the national survey of principals, for example, found that 
more than three-quarters of primary schools (78%), and nearly nine out of ten post-primary schools 
(88%), made use of the NCTE’s ICT Planning and Advice for Schools (2002). Furthermore, 65% of 
primary schools were also found to have made use of other ICT planning documents made available 
by the SDPS. The survey also revealed that 71% of primary schools had a written ICT plan. The 
corresponding figure for post-primary schools was considerably lower, at 46%. It was also found, 
however, that whole-school ICT planning was much more prevalent than ICT planning at the level of 
the individual teacher. 

In the primary case-study schools responsibility for managing and co-ordinating ICT normally lay with 
the principal. However, in a number of these schools the duties were undertaken by an ICT steering 
committee, or the deputy principal, or an ICT co-ordinator, or a combination of personnel. At post-
primary level the role was more usually undertaken by a nominated ICT co-ordinating teacher. Few 
schools were found to have convened ICT steering committees to assist with planning for the 
development of ICT in their school. 

43 Factors such as the ICT planning days that were organised throughout the country for school principals by the NCTE, the advice 
provided by the NCCA on ICT planning for primary schools in its Information and Communications Technology (ICT) in the Primary 
School Curriculum: Guidelines for Teachers (2004), and the introduction of whole-school evaluation (WSE) and other inspection 
activities by the DES. 

71 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
4.2.1 The ICT steering committee 
The evaluation found that ICT steering committees were not prevalent in schools. Only four of the 
thirty-two primary and twenty post-primary case-study schools visited had established a permanent 
ICT steering committee. A small number of schools, however, were found to have established a 
temporary committee. 

One of the two primary schools that had an ICT steering committee had an enrolment of a little less 
than two hundred students. In this case the permanent committee of teachers acted as a support to 
the principal, who had the main responsibility in the school for the co-ordination of ICT. In the 
second primary school, with an enrolment of fifty students, a temporary committee of three people 
had been established to assist only in the review of the school’s ICT policy. 

A number of factors contributed to the lack of steering committees in primary schools. Firstly, the 
size of the school tended to affect whether such a committee was established or not: small schools 
tended not to have access to sufficient personnel to convene a committee. Secondly, the size of a 
school’s ICT infrastructure was an influencing factor: small-scale infrastructures tended not to 
warrant the convening of a committee. Thirdly, some schools were reticent about setting up a 
committee because of people’s normal work load. 

The ICT steering committee in one of the two post-primary schools that had such a committee 
comprised four people, while the second school had six on its committee. Each of these committees 
included a member of the school’s senior management, the school’s ICT co-ordinator, and 
representatives of the teaching staff. One school visited committed itself in its ICT plan to setting up 
an ICT planning team whose membership would comprise “representatives from teaching and 
administrative staff, students and parents.” 

In three case-study post-primary schools it was found that an ICT steering committee, or planning 
group, had been convened for the sole purpose of managing the development of an ICT plan for 
their school, and once this task had been completed the meetings of the committee ceased. One of 
these schools described itself as having an “informal ICT steering group.” In the evaluation report 
the inspector commented: 

Currently, there is an informal ICT steering group. However, the school intends to set up a formal ICT 
steering committee with representatives of all subject departments. This group will have the objectives of 
ensuring that all subject departments’ ICT needs are met, that there is effective integration of ICT in the 
classroom, that monitoring and consideration of technological developments take place and that 
monitoring and review of the ICT plan and development of the school’s ICT plan in the areas of hardware 
and software renewal are implemented. The formation of an ICT steering committee is encouraged. The 
school has developed a system of rotating the position of committee chairpersons as part of its school 
development planning process and implementation of this system with the ICT steering committee is 
acknowledged as beneficial. 

72 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
Notwithstanding the small number of schools with ICT committees, it is considered good practice to 
have such a committee. An ICT steering committee in a school can contribute to the general 
development of ICT. Furthermore, the development of an effective ICT plan becomes a shared 
process, and the remit of such a committee can go beyond the development of the plan: it can also 
include a monitoring role with regard to progress in implementing the plan. 

To maximise participation by the school and the community in ICT planning, schools—particularly 
post-primary schools and larger primary schools—should convene an ICT steering committee to 
manage the development of an ICT plan and monitor its continuous implementation. Consideration 
should be given to involving members of the board of management, parents, and the local 
community. 

4.2.2 The ICT co-ordinator 
The job of managing and co-ordinating ICT in a school was found to be the responsibility of a 
nominated co-ordinating teacher in all twenty post-primary case-study schools that were evaluated. 
Such a role for a teacher was found to be much less common in primary schools, where the task fell 
predominantly to the principal. 

The vision and enthusiasm of the primary-school principal and teachers (or, in some instances, the 
school management, comprising both the board of management and the principal) in engaging with 
ICT and developing it in their school was commended in 26 of the 32 case-study schools visited. In 
most of these schools the principal had assumed responsibility for ICT and was generally described as 
having introduced it into the school. The principals promoted its use throughout their schools and 
were described by inspectors as “keen,” “committed,” “interested,” and “enthusiastic.” It was clear 
from the reports that the success of the integration and development of ICT in schools was 
dependent very much on the vision and commitment of the principal. One report stated that 

the principal’s commitment in terms of time and effort, and his vision for infrastructural development, staff 
development and management of routine ICT issues are most commendable particularly in view of the 
many constraints identified by school personnel during the visit. 

The principals in these twenty-six schools were usually aware of the benefits to be had from using ICT 
and were generally found to be actively considering how challenges could be met. They were 
described as being open to new ideas and committed to embedding ICT in teaching and learning. 

Schools varied in the way they integrated the role of a nominated ICT co-ordinating teacher in their 
school management structure. While there was a nominated co-ordinating teacher in only a few of 
the primary case-study schools evaluated, the work carried out by such a person was usually either 
part of the duties attached to the post of responsibility of a special-duties teacher (SDT) or the sole 
duty of such a post. 

73 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
In the majority of the twenty post-primary schools visited, the role of ICT co-ordinator was attached 
to a post of responsibility, and while most of those took the form of an SDT post, a few were 
attached to an assistant principal post. In a few post-primary schools it was found that either the 
principal or the deputy principal undertook the role of ICT co-ordinator, while in a smaller number of 
schools it was found that the role of ICT co-ordinator was not part of the post of responsibility 
structure at all. Finally, in one post-primary school visited the person acting as ICT co-ordinator did 
so in a voluntary capacity. It was clear from all the evaluations, however, that there was little 
consistency among the different schools in the work load attached to posts. 

While it was found that teachers who acted as ICT co-ordinators were key players in schools’ ICT 
planning, planning duties were not the only ones attached to their role; indeed in some schools ICT 
planning constituted only a minor part of the role. In general it was found that, while the duties of 
the ICT co-ordinator were clearly defined in only a small number of schools, there was considerable 
variety in the tasks undertaken. Examples of duties attached to the role at both primary and post-
primary level included: 
• managing the development of the ICT plan and co-ordinating its implementation 
• involvement in curriculum development 
• ICT resources management, to include the auditing and purchasing of resources 
• installing software 
• system administration, maintenance, and technical support 
• liaison with subcontracted technical support 
• liaison with the NCTE and other relevant support services 
• networking issues 
• identifying training needs and facilitating staff training 
• developing relevant links with outside agencies. 

At first glance this list might suggest that ICT co-ordinators had a relatively high level of technical 
expertise. While some had, others did not have the capacity to manage and maintain modern ICT 
equipment and resources. A number of schools (as referred to in chapter 3) had external 
maintenance contractors, and frequently in those schools the ICT co-ordinator was solely 
responsible for collaborating with such contractors. 

Most of the interviews with ICT co-ordinating teachers revealed that they would like to see their role 
having a greater emphasis on pedagogy than on the area of systems administration and 
maintenance. In the main it was found that opportunities did not present themselves regularly for 
ICT co-ordinators to work with colleagues on relevant pedagogical ICT issues. Instead co-ordinators 
found a lot of their time was taken up with technical or troubleshooting issues. One co-ordinator 
spoke of the role in the following terms: 

I don’t consider myself as a formal ICT co-ordinator, but more as an IT technician and advisor. I maintain 
the IT system and network in the school; I service, repair and build computers. I install software, set up 
equipment for presentations, source quotations for new equipment and submit projects to management. 

74 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
Co-ordinators complained that this advisory or “troubleshooting” role sometimes distracted them 
from their teaching duties, especially where colleagues called on them to solve technical issues 
during teaching time. Another issue regularly reported by co-ordinators was the lack of time 
available to them for performing their duties effectively. This was noted particularly where a 
significant element of technical support was required of the co-ordinator. 

It was clear from the case-study school evaluations that the use of ICT was more efficient if 
someone in the school had direct responsibility for its management and co-ordination. Furthermore, 
efficiency was found to be optimal in those schools where the role of the co-ordinator was clearly 
defined and the relevant tasks were discharged accordingly. In this regard schools should consider 
the following duties: 
• co-ordinating the development and production of the ICT plan 
• identifying training needs and facilitating staff training 
• developing strategies for the integration of ICT throughout the curriculum 
• liaison with senior management and advising on ICT strategies 
• evaluating the use of ICT and encouraging greater use by teachers and students 
• developing a means by which the ICT infrastructure can be maintained and upgraded. 

School management personnel should ensure that their ICT co-ordinating teacher has adequate 
time to perform their duties in an effective manner. The ICT co-ordinator has a significant role to 
play in the successful integration of ICT throughout the curriculum in any school, and to achieve this 
they need to devote time to assisting their colleagues in using ICT to aid teaching and learning. They 
also need to liase with the NCTE and other relevant support services. 

ICT co-ordinators in schools would benefit from engaging with one another on a professional level, 
sharing information and learning from one another, as well as organising such activities as training 
and exhibitions. ICT co-ordinators should therefore be facilitated in setting up an association or 
network of schools’ ICT co-ordinators. 

4.2.3 The ICT plan 
An analysis of the national survey of principals found that 157 (71%) of the 220 primary principals 
who responded to the question reported that their school had a written ICT plan. At post-primary 
level 50 (46%) of the 108 principals who responded had such a plan. Furthermore, the survey 
revealed that slightly less than half (48%) of primary schools and slightly more than half (55%) of 
post-primary schools with such plans updated them at least annually. Larger schools were more 
likely to have an ICT plan and to update it regularly than smaller schools. 

Drawing up the ICT plan 

The survey of principals found that a variety of practices exist in schools with regard to the 
development of ICT plans. The survey revealed, for example, that 96% of both the primary and 

75 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
post-primary schools that had an ICT plan provided opportunities for teachers’ involvement in the 
formulation of their plans. At primary level the majority of schools (54%) reported also involving 
their board of management in the process, while fewer than half (42%) reported involving in-school 
management personnel. Some 58% of post-primary schools reported involving their board of 
management in the process, while 78% involved senior in-school management personnel. 

Parents and local businesses or community representatives were the two groups least likely to be 
involved in the development of a school’s ICT plan. Only 24% of primary and 38% of post-primary 
schools reported involving parents in the development of their plan, while 4½% of primary and 
20% of post-primary schools reported involving local businesses or their local community, or both. 

Similar personnel were found to be involved in any review of the ICT plan that took place. The 
survey found that practically all principals in the primary and post-primary schools that had an ICT 
plan reported involving teachers in any review of the plan. Some 79% of post-primary schools 
reported that senior in-school management personnel were involved in the review process, while 
48% of primary schools reported that their board of management was involved. 

The case-study school evaluations provided a greater insight into how schools develop their ICT 
plans and highlighted a number of significant issues: 
• In a small number of case-study schools the ICT planning process involved only school 

management personnel, usually a member of the school’s senior management (for example 
principal or deputy principal) and the ICT co-ordinator. It was noted in the evaluation reports for 
schools where this occurred that some teachers were unaware of the existence of an ICT plan for 
their school. 

• Teachers regularly reported during interviews that their school did provide them with 
opportunities to get involved in the development of their school’s ICT plan. This usually took the 
form of management inviting staff members to contribute their views on the plan as it went 
through its various stages of development. Many teachers, however, spoke of not availing of this 
opportunity. This was generally attributed to their lack of time or lack of knowledge of ICT plans. 

• Few schools were found to have either sought or received support from their local ICT advisor 
when developing their plan. Furthermore, while the NCTE provided seminars around the country 
for school principals on school planning for ICT, few made reference to any benefits that they 
gained from attending. 

It is clear that schools should seek the services of relevant support services to support their work in 
ICT planning. Schools also need to become more active in engaging teachers and relevant sections 
of their community in the development of their ICT plan. 

Contents of the ICT plan 

Principals of schools that had an ICT plan were asked in their national survey to state the areas that 
were addressed in their plan. Fig. 4.1 and fig. 4.2 provide details of the common areas addressed in 
the ICT plans of primary and post-primary schools, respectively. 

76 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
Fig. 4.1: Contents of ICT plans, primary schools 

What is addressed in the ICT plan? 

School vision with regard to use/importance of ICT 
Internet usage 
Access to, and use of, computers and equipment 
Resources 
Roles and responsibilities 
Support for pupils with special needs 
Hardware maintenance 
Hardware replacement 
How ICT is used to support teaching and learning 
Budget and purchasing 
Teacher training and development in ICT 
Programmes of work for individual class levels 
Assessment of pupil progress in ICT 
School website 

95% 
82% 
81% 
68% 
66% 
59% 
58% 
51% 
49% 
42% 
38% 
37% 
24% 
23% 
Base: All primary principals with an ICT plan (n=157) 
20% 40% 60% 80% 100%0% 
Fig. 4.2: Contents of ICT plans, post-primary schools 

What is addressed in the ICT plan? 

Internet usage 
School vision with regard to use and importance of ICT 
Access to, and use of, computers and equipment 
Hardware maintenance 
Hardware replacement 
Teacher training and development in ICT 
Roles and responsibilities 
Resources 
Support for students with special needs 
School website 
Budget and purchasing 
How ICT is used to support teaching and learning 
Assessment of student progress in ICT 
Programmes of work for individual class levels 

Base: All post-primary principals with an ICT plan (n=50 ) 
20% 40% 60% 80% 100%0% 
98% 
94% 
86% 
72% 
70% 
68% 
60% 
60% 
56% 
52% 
48% 
30% 
30% 
18% 
77 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
The main topics addressed in primary and post-primary ICT plans were “school vision with regard to 
the use and importance of ICT,” “internet usage,” and “access to, and use of, computers and 
equipment.” Such issues as “hardware maintenance,” “hardware replacement,” “resources” and 
“roles and responsibilities” were also common. References to “how ICT is used to support teaching 
and learning,” “programmes of work for individual class levels” and “assessment of student 
progress in ICT” did not feature prominently in plans. 

As would be expected, the contents of the ICT plans reported by principals in their survey and those 
reviewed by inspectors in case-study schools were broadly similar. Some of the plans reviewed 
included hardware and software inventories, and where these were not included inspectors 
generally recommended that they be compiled. Some schools were also advised to consider the 
possibility of using ICT to engage in collaborative projects with schools from other countries. Also, in 
contrast to the findings of the survey of principals, details of how ICT was used to facilitate teaching 
and learning featured highly in the ICT plans of the post-primary case-study schools visited. This may 
have been influenced, however, by the fact that case-study schools were notified in advance of their 
participation in the evaluation; there was evidence that certain review or upgrading work was 
undertaken in respect of some ICT plans before the visit of the inspector. 

On the whole, schools’ ICT plans concentrate more on infrastructural issues than on how ICT can be 
used to enhance teaching and learning. This is evidenced by the fact that more plans referred to 
hardware maintenance and replacement issues, to roles and responsibility issues and to access issues 
than to issues concerned with the actual use of ICT in the classroom. Only 37% of the primary 
schools surveyed and 9 of the 32 case-study primary schools evaluated, for example, included 
programmes of work for individual class levels in their ICT plans. Furthermore, less than a quarter of 
those surveyed and only four case-study schools included details of how they assessed students’ 
progress in the development of ICT skills. At post-primary level few schools included details of how 
they would assess, if at all, students’ progress in the area of ICT skills development as they moved 
from junior cycle to senior cycle. 

Furthermore, few school plans included details of the work their students were exposed to as part 
of their dedicated computer studies lessons. In effect, this meant that little or no programme 
planning existed with regard to students’ dedicated ICT lessons. In planning for dedicated ICT 
lessons, best practice was observed when ICT plans outlined the relevant aims, objectives, time 
allocations, grouping of students, course materials used, planning for students with special needs, 
teaching methods, health and safety considerations, and assessment strategies. It was also 
considered best practice when continuity and progression in work were clear from the programmes 
of work in the ICT plans. Post-primary schools should plan an appropriate curriculum for all class 
groups that are provided with dedicated ICT lessons. 

78 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
The inspectors regularly recommended to case-study schools that they review their ICT plan and in 
so doing that they recast the balance between the infrastructural and the educational focus. One 
primary school evaluation report, for example, commented: 

The school has an ICT plan which takes into account areas such as: development of the ICT facilities, 
timetabling, network, usage, assessment, teacher usage of equipment, staff development, educational 
objectives, ICT and special needs, and an ICT roadmap which outlines some of the skills which students 
are expected to acquire during their time in school. Although this list of skills is very suitable it could be 
further expanded and developed and consideration should be given to delineating at what class level 
these skills are achieved by students. 

One post-primary school report commented: 

Though the plan describes in detail the hardware and software provision that is envisaged the document 
does not deal with how ICT is to be integrated into teaching and learning. It is recommended that the 
plan be reviewed to include a strategic vision for the development of ICT and its integration in teaching 
and learning in the school. 

A school’s ICT plan should emphasise the use of ICT in teaching and learning situations. The NCTE’s 
document ICT Planning and Advice for Schools (2002) provides advice to schools on what should be 
included in an ICT plan. The planning matrix (see appendix) provides a suggested framework for the 
contents of a plan, including: ICT management and planning; ICT and the curriculum; staff 
members’ professional development; schools’ ICT culture; and ICT resources and infrastructure. 

It is recommended that schools develop their own ICT plan. The process of developing the plan 
should be a consultative one, with opportunities at post-primary level for appropriate consideration 
to be given to subject-specific needs by relevant subject departments. Relevant support documents 
should be fully used. Plans should emphasise the use of ICT in teaching and learning. To this end, 
for example, plans should include information on how ICT is used to facilitate teaching and 
learning, details of programmes of work for individual class levels, and particulars of how students’ 
progress in ICT is to be assessed. Once agreed, the plan should be brought to the attention of all 
members of the staff, and its regular monitoring and review should be implemented. This is an area 
where more extensive use could be made of the the significant expertise of ICT co-ordinators. 

4.2.4 The acceptable-use policy 
With the introduction of broadband access to schools44 and the heightened awareness of the risks 
of students having access to undesirable material on the web, the evaluation showed that there was 
a strong emphasis in schools on developing an appropriate internet AUP. 

The survey of principals revealed that more than 80% of both primary and post-primary schools had 
an AUP. While practically all AUPs in schools applied to students, the survey also showed that 80% 

44 Schools are required to certify that they have an AUP before they are connected to the schools network under the Schools Broadband 
Access Programme managed by the NCTE. 

79 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
of them at primary level and 75% at post-primary level applied also to teachers. At primary level 
57% applied to ancillary staff members, while at post-primary level the corresponding figure was 
55%. From the survey of teachers it was found that approximately 70% of primary and 63% of 
post-primary teachers were familiar with their school’s AUP. This proportion tended to increase at 
primary level with regard to those teachers with more teaching experience, while at post-primary 
level it was unexpectedly lower for schools with a low SCR. 

AUPs were prevalent in case-study schools, with almost all the schools evaluated having one. 
Inspectors’ reviews of these policies found that practically all of them covered the use of the 
internet. Few, however, referred to the health and safety risks, predominantly ergonomic in nature, 
associated with the use of computer hardware.45 It is recommended that schools have guidelines to 
cover such areas. 

Devising a policy on acceptable use of the internet is an important step in addressing the issue of 
internet safety in the school. All schools should have their own acceptable-use policy for computer 
hardware, software, and the internet. As was the case in some case-study schools, this should be 
developed in partnership with parents and should address, among other things, all the rights, 
privileges and responsibilities associated with use of the internet and on-line services. It should 
incorporate a code of conduct that should be agreed by all participants and be incorporated in the 
school’s ICT plan. The NCTE’s Internet Safety Pack (2007) and the template for developing an AUP 
on the Department’s website can act as a resource for all schools in this regard.46 The template is the 
latest version of one originally developed by the NCTE for inclusion in its publication Be Wise on the 
Net: Information and Advice for Schools (2002). 

4.3 Implementation of ICT planning 
It is important that schools do not view the development of an ICT plan as an end in itself. However, 
some schools clearly do so when they convene a team to develop a plan and then disband the team 
once the task is complete. An effective ICT plan, if implemented daily and in accordance with its 
underlying principles, will have an impact on the use and development of ICT in a school. Schools 
should ensure, however, that they have procedures for the regular monitoring and review of their 
ICT plan. There are a number of ways in which a school can do this, including (as alluded to in 
section 4.2.1) the role that an ICT steering committee can play in monitoring its progress. 

Two areas were examined to provide an accurate indication of the extent of the implementation of 
ICT planning. The first is concerned with the professional development of teachers. For example, to 
what extent were schools actively facilitating teachers in attending appropriate training that would 
allow them to integrate ICT in their classroom practice? The second area explored was the extent of 

45 There may be risks of eye strain associated with the prolonged use of monitors, as well as risks to a user’s posture from the prolonged 

use of computers. 
46 See www.education.ie for the ICT policy template, along with templates for common school policies. 

80 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
use of ICT by teachers in their lesson planning and preparation work, as well as the extent of their 
planning for the use of ICT in the teaching and learning process. Was the school’s ICT planning 
having an impact at the level of the individual teacher and classroom? 

4.3.1 Teachers’ professional development 
An analysis of the national survey of principals found that approximately 30% of primary schools 
and 57% of post-primary schools had provided at least one in-school or external ICT training course 
for their staff within the previous three years. 

Schools’ provision of ICT professional development for staff 

Fig. 4.3 shows that 17% of the 234 primary-school principals who responded to this survey 
question stated that in-school training was provided, while 16% reported that external training was 
provided within this time frame. Primary schools were found to rarely offer both in-school and 
external staff training. 

Fig. 4.3: Staff ICT training in primary schools within the previous three years 

30% 

20% 

10% 

0% 

Base: All primary principals (n=234) 

Fig. 4.4 shows that slightly more than half (51%) of the 110 post-primary principals who responded 
stated that in-school training was provided, while about a quarter (26%) stated that external 
training was provided within this time frame. 

17% 16% 
In-school External 


81 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
Fig. 4.4: Staff ICT training in post-primary schools within the previous three years 

60% 

40% 

20% 

0% 

Base: All post-primary principals (n=110) 

Schools’ ICT co-ordinators (as well as the principal in the case of primary schools) were generally 
found to facilitate any in-school training provided, and sometimes presented the training also. At 
post-primary level it was common for a member of the teaching staff to present such training. The 
NCTE and the ICT advisory service were generally found to facilitate external training in local 
education centres. Subject associations also played an important role in facilitating teachers with 
external training, especially in subject-specific software training. 

82 


51% 
26% 
In-school External 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
The survey found that a higher rate of in-school training was organised by larger schools (36% of 
primary schools with more than 200 students, compared with only 5% with fewer than 100 
students; 59% of post-primary schools with more than 400 students, compared with 41% with 
fewer than 400 students). It is likely that this is because of the higher concentration of staff 
members, and therefore possible participants, in the larger schools. However, it is possible for small 
schools to work together in groups to organise specific training for their staff members. In the case 
of external training the survey showed no notable difference in the rate of provision between school 
type, sector or size at either the primary or the post-primary level. 

The type of ICT professional development courses attended by teachers 

The extent of teachers’ attendance at ICT professional development courses was garnered from the 
national survey of teachers. They were asked to state, from a list provided, what courses organised 
by the NCTE or ICT advisory service they had attended. Table 4.1 reveals some patterns in relation to 
attendance at these courses. 

Table 4.1: Teachers’ attendance at NCTE and ICT advisory service training courses 

Course Primary teachers Post-primary teachers 
Primary phase 1 34.2% 65% 
Primary phase 2 27% 50.3% 
Basic troubleshooting 13.7% 8.8% 
Computer networking 4.4% 7.5% 
Introduction to digital media 22.6% 7.8% 
Digital video for learning 6.5% 2.1% 
Empowering minds: using control technologies 2.3% 1.1% 
Internet and e-mail for learning 24.5% 13.1% 
Web site design and development for learning 14.8% 8.8% 
Intel “Teach to the Future” 20.3% 20.6% 
Support groups 5.7% 3.2% 
ICT and special needs: the basics 12% 4% 
ICT and special needs: learning support 5.7% 2.9% 
ICT and special needs: mild GLD 1.1% 0.5% 
ICT and special needs: moderate, severe or profound GLD 0.4% 0.3% 
ICT and special needs: deaf or hard of hearing 0 0 
ICT and special needs:visual impairment 0.2% 0 
ICT and special needs: autistic-spectrum disorders 0.4% 0.3% 
ICT and Geography 5.1% 
ICT and Mathematics 7.2% 
ICT and Science 5.9% 
ICT and Guidance 1.9% 
Other (e.g. ECDL) 21.1% 5.1% 

83 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
It is clear from the responses and from discussions with teachers in case-study schools that many 
felt they had benefited from phase I and II training associated with IT 2000. Table 4.1 also shows 
that generic programmes of professional development (for example IT 2000 phase I and II, Intel 
“Teach to the Future”) tend to attract a greater take-up among teachers than those dealing with 
particular topics or specific subjects. This is presumably due in large part to the fact that generic 
courses have an appeal throughout the teaching profession, while topic or subject-specific courses 
are relevant to defined groups within the profession. 

While teachers in case-study schools reported during interviews that they had attended professional 
development courses provided by relevant support services, a substantial proportion stated that they 
had received limited training during these courses in how to actually integrate ICT in their teaching. 
While it is understood that such training is an integral part of current professional development 
programmes, it is recommended that greater attention be paid to this area in the future. 

Training methods associated with ICT professional development courses 

Primary teachers reported that their preferred training method was a school-based course. Almost 
four out of five teachers (79%) of the 1,162 respondents rated this method in their top three 
choices. This method was popular primarily because the training in these settings generally makes 
use only of equipment and resources that are readily available to the teachers. 

84 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
Post-primary teachers reported that their preferred training method was a tutor-led course (or face-
to-face training) in their local education centre. Nearly three out of four post-primary teachers (73%) 
of the 800 respondents rated this method in their top three choices. The second choice for primary 
teachers was tutor-led courses in an education centre (74%), whereas at post-primary level it was 
the school-based course (69%). The third most popular method for all teachers was a tutor-
facilitated ICT support group in the education centre. This finding is particularly important from the 
viewpoint of the school management: when organising ICT training for staff members, the 
management should be aware of teachers’ preferred training methods. 

Some issues arose, particularly during interviews with teachers at post-primary level, regarding the 
courses provided in education centres. Many teachers expressed dissatisfaction with the fact that 
the majority of these courses took place outside normal school hours, and many spoke of having to 
travel long distances to attend them. Others also mentioned that there was a distinct lack of 
“joined-up-thinking” or progression regarding the courses they attended or were offered. A further 
issue concerned the wide range of abilities and experiences commonly found in groups of teachers 
attending training courses. Given the varied levels of proficiency of teachers in ICT, however, it is 
accepted that this is an issue that will inevitably arise. Nevertheless it is recommended that course 
organisers and presenters take appropriate steps to minimise its impact on the learning experience 
of the teachers attending a course. 

Teachers’ further ICT professional development needs 

In their survey, principals were asked to specify the areas in which they considered teacher training 
to be necessary to further facilitate effective teaching and learning in the classroom. In their 
questionnaire teachers were asked separately to state what they felt were their personal 
requirements for further professional development. Fig. 4.5 and fig. 4.6 show the responses 
received from primary and post-primary principals and teachers in relation to teacher education 
needs regarding effective classroom practice.47 In general, the findings suggest that greater 
communication between principals and teachers regarding the content, and indeed the mode, of 
ICT professional development would benefit teachers. The evaluation found considerable divergence 
between the views of principals and teachers regarding the extent and nature of the professional 
development needs of teachers. Furthermore, it would appear from the findings that principals 
perceive teachers to have somewhat greater training needs than do the teachers themselves. This is 
not to suggest, however, that teachers do not have a strong awareness of their training needs. 

47 Although the wording of the priorities in the questionnaire for principals was not exactly the same as that in the questionnaire for 
teachers, similar items were matched (where possible) between the questionnaires. 

85 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
Fig. 4.5: Principals’ and teachers’ views on ICT training requirements, primary schools 

Priorities for further professional development 
[Principals and teachers] 

Digital imaging/peripherals 
Computer troubleshooting 
Subject-specific use of ICT/software 
Developing a school website 
ICT and special educational needs 
Computer networking 
Use of Internet / email in teaching and learning 
Software specific (in classroom) 
Project-based learning 
Internet safety 

20% 40% 60% 80%0% 
77% 
58% 
66% 
41% 
60% 
37% 
59% 
41% 
53% 
44% 
53% 
40% 
50% 
59% 
40% 
71% 
43% 
n/a 
n/a 
38% 
Principal 

Teacher 

Base: All primary principals (n=234) and teachers (n=1162) 

Primary-school principals identified further professional development needs for their teaching staff 
in most items (especially the use of digital imaging and peripherals), while teachers were more 
interested in the software-specific use of ICT in the classroom. Recent changes to the primary 
curriculum, coupled with the work of the PCSP, could be contributing to this perceived further 
training need of teachers. 

86 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
Fig. 4.6: Principals’ and teachers’ views on ICT training requirements, post-primary schools 

Priorities for further professional development 
[Principals and teachers] 

Subject-specific use of ICT 

ICT and special educational needs 

Peripherals, e.g. digital camera 

Computer troubleshooting 

Internet/email 

Software specific (in classroom) 

Computer networking 

School website 

Project-based learning 

Internet safety 

25% 50% 75% 100%0% 
94% 
62% 
81% 
25% 
77% 
48% 
68% 
34% 
52% 
64% 
45% 
78% 
44% 
31% 
44% 
22% 
37% 
35% 
n/a 
n/a 
Principal 

Teacher 

Base: All post-primary principals (n=110) and teachers (n=800) 

Almost all post-primary principals (94%) reported that teachers required training in the subject-
specific use of ICT, while this area of training was given priority by fewer than two-thirds of teachers 
(62%). Conversely, more than three-quarters of teachers (78%) reported a need for training in the 
use of specific software in the classroom, while fewer than half the principals (45%) chose this area. 

Table 4.2 shows the further ICT professional development preferences of post-primary teachers by 
subject. It can be seen that teachers of Irish, foreign languages and the social studies I and II groups 
of subjects were most likely to select further professional development in the classroom use of 
educational software. These teachers, along with teachers of English, were also slightly more likely 
to select professional development in using the internet in teaching and learning, in using standard 
applications, and in project-based learning. This finding could be influenced by the fact that a 
number of these subjects (for example, History and Geography) require access to sources of 
information that are most readily available electronically, and that teachers of these subjects would 
like to be in a position to obtain this kind of information more easily. Recent changes to syllabuses, 
along with the work of relevant subject support services in schools, could be contributing to this 
perceived need for further training. The findings also show that there is scope for subject 
associations to organise or provide subject-specific professional development courses for teachers. 

87 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
Table 4.2: Professional development preferences of post-primary teachers, by subject 

% of subject teachers who opted for further professional development in the particular area 

EnglishMathematicsIrishForeign LanguagesScienceBusiness StudiesApplied ScienceSocial Studies ISocial Studies IITotal 

Classroom use of 
educational software 74 72 85 83 65 73 74 79 82 75 
Classroom use of 
standard applications 
(e.g. desktop 
publishing, 
spreadsheets) 49 37 55 49 41 51 39 48 52 44 
Computer networking 28 34 28 31 38 27 31 28 28 30 
Computer 
troubleshooting 37 33 29 24 42 27 41 35 32 33 
Developing a school 
web site 19 27 19 21 26 29 22 19 25 22 
Digital imaging (e.g. 
digital cameras, 
digital video) 41 45 49 40 50 52 55 50 51 48 
ICT and special 
educational needs 27 27 27 27 21 22 21 28 26 25 
Internet safety 29 32 38 37 30 38 29 34 40 34 
Project-based learning 44 30 46 37 37 30 42 42 42 37 
Subject-specific use 
of ICT 64 64 67 74 65 64 54 63 62 63 
Using the internet in 
teaching and learning 74 56 70 75 65 60 54 67 69 64 

Good practice regarding teachers’ ICT professional development 

The quality of a school’s efforts to cater for the ICT training needs of its teaching staff was singled 
out by inspectors as being effective in less than half the primary case-study schools visited and in 
only a quarter of those post-primary schools evaluated. The use of the word “effective” in reports 
usually meant that a school had plans to provide its teaching staff with appropriate training and that 
those plans were being realised, or that it was actively developing training plans for staff members. 
The identification of the training needs of teachers in the use of ICT also featured strongly in whole-
school planning in these schools, as is appropriate. It was also usually noted in reports from these 
schools that teachers had engaged at some level with various professional development courses in 
ICT. One primary inspection report stated: 

88 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
All staff members have had a reasonable level of basic skills training, with some staff [members] currently 
participating in ICT courses emphasising the integration of ICT in the curriculum. Four teachers have 
undertaken on-line in-service courses on issues regarding special educational needs in the last term. 

One post-primary school inspection report commented: 

This training included NCTE Phase 1 and Phase 2 education courses, VEC night classes, European 
Computer Driving Licence (ECDL) courses, Joint Examining Board certification and Intel Teach to the 
Future courses. 

It was common in these reports to read phrases such as “There was a good level of expertise among 
staff” or “Teachers were eager to engage in further training.” It was frequently reported that 
teachers in these schools regularly shared their ICT skills, expertise and experience with each other. 
Some schools even provided ICT training for parents. Mention was also usually made of the 
commitment displayed by teachers in attending professional development courses, which usually 
took place after school hours. 

In the remaining case-study schools visited inspectors generally recommended that efforts be 
directed towards catering for the training needs of the teaching staff, particularly training that 
would allow them to better integrate ICT in their classroom practice. In particular, schools were 
advised: 
• to implement training plans that existed, or consider short on-site training courses 
• to review the ICT training needs of their staff members and develop appropriate training plans 

for them 
• to monitor the training needs of staff members 
• to concentrate on the integration of ICT in teaching and learning in any training provided 
• to use the expertise already available among staff members, and even among students 
• to liaise with the ICT advisor in their local education centre with a view to seeking assistance in 

developing and running ICT training courses for staff members; schools were also asked to 

consider liaison with other support personnel 
• to include references to professional development plans in the ICT plan for their school 
• to develop a mentor system, whereby experienced teachers could assist teachers who were 

unfamiliar with the technology. 

Teachers in case-study schools generally reported that the ICT professional development courses 
they attended had an effect on the extent of their use of ICT during teaching. While it is difficult to 
pinpoint the level of this influence, it was interesting to note that when asked to state what factors 
facilitated the development of ICT in their classrooms, teachers nearly always mentioned their 
attendance at relevant professional development courses. 

89 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
4.3.2 Using ICT in classroom and lesson planning and preparation 
From interviews with individual mainstream teachers and special-education teachers in primary 
schools, the inspectors found that more than two-thirds (69%) of mainstream teachers and 61% of 
special-education teachers reported using ICT to plan and prepare for their teaching. Interestingly, 
teachers in primary schools with a higher SCR were slightly more likely to use ICT to plan (78%) 
than teachers in schools with a low SCR (65%).48 In post-primary schools, inspectors found that 
nearly four out of five subject teachers (79%) reported that they used ICT when preparing their 
lessons. 

The way in which teachers used ICT in their lesson planning and preparation was explored in some 
detail through the survey of teachers and the case-study school evaluation reports. One area of 
interest was the extent of teachers’ use of computers and applications as part of their planning and 
preparation work. An emphasis was also placed on examining whether teachers used internet 
resources when preparing lessons. Particular attention was given to teachers’ use of the Scoilnet 
web site, the education portal developed and maintained by the NCTE.49 

Use of computers in lesson planning and preparation 

Teachers were asked in their national survey how frequently they used computers for lesson 
preparation. This could be for creating templates or producing students’ worksheets, hand-outs, 
revision notes, or similar resources. As illustrated in fig. 4.7, 82% of primary and 78% of post-
primary respondents reported using computers for this purpose, though at different frequencies. 

Fig. 4.7: Use of computers for lesson preparation 


a month a month 

Primary teachers 

Post-primary teachers 

Base: 1,162 primary and 800 post-primary teachers 

48 See note 19 (chapter 2) for a definition of SCR. 

49 Scoilnet, according to the NCTE web site (September 2006), is one of the most popular sites devoted to facilitating the work of 
education professionals. The site was launched in 1998 and is managed by the NCTE. It actively promotes the integration of ICT in 
teaching and learning by making resources available for downloading, such as lesson plans, interactive and printable worksheets, 
notes, and multimedia resources. The learning materials for pupils available from the site are curriculum-focused and are selected and 
reviewed by curriculum specialists and teachers. 

90 


50% 
40% 
30% 
20% 
10% 
0% 
At least once a week About 2/3 times Less than twice Never 
40% 40% 
20% 20% 21% 21%
18% 19% 

ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
The use of the computer for lesson preparation was realated the teacher’s age. Of those under 
thirty-five, 90% of primary teachers and 92% of post-primary teachers reported using computers 
for preparation purposes, compared with 71% (primary) and 68% (post-primary) of teachers over 
forty-five. 

The post-primary survey showed that teachers in schools with a low SCR were more likely to use 
computers for lesson preparation (84%). It would be reasonable to assume that this was because of 
the higher number of computers available for use. While there was little variation in the level of 
computer use in preparation for teaching and learning in different subject areas, it was found that a 
lower than average proportion of teachers of Irish reported using computers for this purpose. 

Fig. 4.8 gives an indication of the type of resources that primary teachers generate as a result of 
their use of computers for lesson planning and preparation. It provides details of the responses 
received from the 104 mainstream primary teachers who reported during interviews with inspectors 
that they used ICT to provide resources for teaching. Interestingly, those interviews found that 
teachers in schools with a higher SCR were slightly more likely to use ICT to provide resources or 
aids for their teaching (89%) than teachers in schools with a low SCR (78%). 

Fig. 4.8: Resources provided by mainstream primary teachers using ICT 

Workcards Flashcards Charts Powerpoint Web/internet 
presentation/graphics 

Base: All mainstream class teachers using ICT to provide resources for teaching (n=104) 

The reasons why teachers used these resources are varied and consistent with good practice: 
• to reinforce existing teaching and learning methods (especially for teachers in schools with a high 
SCR) 
• to improve the teaching and learning of specific curriculum areas (especially for teachers of senior 
classes) 

91 


80% 
60% 
40% 
20% 
0% 
56% 
47% 
27% 
16% 
9% 

ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
• to improve literacy, reading and writing skills (especially for teachers of junior classes) 

• to introduce more visual and interactive aspects into lessons (especially for teachers in schools 
with a low SCR). 

Computers were found to be used by teachers in their classroom or lesson planning and preparation 
work in most of the fifty-two case-study schools evaluated, even in those schools where the teacher 
may not have been included in ICT planning at the school level (as discussed in section 4.2.3). The 
use of computers for such work in these schools was generally found to be a matter for individual 
teachers. One post-primary report stated: 

At a classroom level it is a matter for individual teachers to plan for the use of ICT in lessons and from 
discussions with a small group of teachers it was clear that planning for use of, as well as actual usage of, 
ICT in teaching is uniformly strong. This is facilitated by the existence of ICT hardware and software in 
certain classrooms. 

The use of computers for lesson planning and preparation in the case-study schools, however, was 
found to vary considerably. At post-primary level in particular their application varied according to 
the subject being taught. In one primary school it was noted that while each teacher had a copy of 
their school’s ICT plan, “there was little evidence to suggest that the ICT plan impacted on individual 
teachers’ planning or that teachers plan formally for the use of ICT.” However, a more typical report 
was as follows: 

[Teachers] wished to further expand their skills in order to become more au fait with the hardware in 
order to make active use of ICT during lessons. Teachers . . . noted [that] technical difficulties, while using 
ICT equipment, were a major problem for them and resulted in a negative outlook towards the whole ICT 
area and their willingness to use the technology. 

Practically all twenty case-study post-primary school evaluation reports referred to the fact that 
“teachers reported using ICT for class preparation, including use of the internet as a resource,” or at 
worst that “teachers’ use of ICT in planning or preparation for their teaching was mixed,” or that 
“planning for [the] use of, as well as actual usage of, ICT in teaching occurs at varying levels.” 

The use of ICT in planning for teaching in special education or learning support was particularly 
prevalent in case-study primary schools, and this was considered good practice. Inspectors 
recommended in many instances that such good practice be replicated throughout mainstream 
teaching settings. 

Internet resources 

In their survey, teachers were asked about the use they made of internet resources in their lesson 
planning and preparation. Table 4.3 shows that 69% of both primary and post-primary teachers 
reported making use of such resources. 

92 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
Table 4.3: Teachers’ use of internet resources in planning and preparation for teaching 

Internet resources 
Age Gender SCR Total 
Under 35 35–45 Over 45 Male Female Low High 
Proportion of primary teachers 
answering yes to using internet 
resources in planning and 
preparing for teaching 

82% 

63% 

47% 

68% 

69% 

71% 

67% 

69% 
n (primary) 

569 

270 

281 

155 

893 

533 

534 

1,162 
Proportion of post-primary 
teachers answering yes 
to using internet resources 
in planning and preparing 
for teaching 

83% 

65% 

59% 

68% 

70% 

67% 

73% 

69% 
n (post-primary) 

272 

210 

290 

260 

468 

323 

321 

800 

The survey found that there was a strong correlation between internet use and age: younger 
teachers were more likely to make use of internet resources than those over thirty-five. It can be 
assumed that this was partly influenced by their exposure to the benefits of ICT during their teacher 
training experience. A higher level of use was also associated with those teachers who had 
computer facilities and internet access in their own classrooms. At primary level the survey also 
showed that teachers of senior classes were slightly more likely to use internet resources in planning 
for teaching (74%) than teachers of junior classes (69%). At post-primary level some differences 
emerged in the use of the internet by teachers for planning and preparation purposes in different 
subjects, as shown in fig. 4.9. 

Fig. 4.9: Use of the internet in planning and preparation for teaching, by subject 

Studies I Studies II Languages Science Studies 

100% 
80% 
60% 
40% 
20% 
0% 
Social Social English Foreign Science Applied Maths Business Irish 
78% 76% 74% 73% 73% 
68% 
63% 62% 
54% 
Base: All post-primary teachers (n=800) 

93 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
A relatively low proportion (54%) of teachers of Irish reported using the internet in planning and 
preparation for teaching, compared with teachers of social studies I and II subjects (78–76%) and 
English (74%). 

Case-study school evaluations found considerable use of the internet by teachers in their planning 
work. They generally used it as a means of “accessing planning resources and ideas which served as 
a stimulus for students.” For example, teachers used the internet to find planning and progress 
record templates and suggestions for teaching activities. Teachers also mentioned, however, that 
significant time and work was required to identify, find or generate appropriate materials. 

Scoilnet 

The survey found that relatively high proportions of teachers use Scoilnet, with some 77% and 67% 
of primary and post-primary teachers, respectively, reporting that they had visited the site within the 
previous two years. Use was found to be slightly higher for teachers under thirty-five. While the level 
of use was similar for primary teachers of both junior and senior classes, the survey showed that 
there were differences in use by post-primary teachers among the subjects taught. A higher 
proportion of teachers of the social studies I and II (75–72%) and science subjects (74%), for 
example, reported making use of the site than teachers of the applied science subjects (60%), Irish 
(63%), and Business Studies (62%). 

In general, however, teachers may be considered as infrequent users of the Scoilnet web site. As can 
be seen from fig. 4.10, some 63% of primary teachers and 62% of post-primary teachers who used 
the site stated that they had visited it less than twice a month in the previous two years. 

Fig. 4.10: Scoilnet visits by teachers 

How frequently do you access 
Scoilnet? 

At least once a week About 2/3 times a month Less than twice a month 


Primary 

Post-primary 

Base: All primary (n=859) and post-primary (n=532) teachers who used Scoilnet during the last two years 

7% 
10% 
30% 28% 
63% 62% 
0% 
20% 
40% 
60% 
80% 
94 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
96% 94% 
14% 
56% 
22% 
9% 
16% 
10% 4% 4% 
1% 1% 
0% 
20% 
40% 
60% 
80% 
100% 
The teachers’ resources area of Scoilnet was very popular, with more than 90% of both primary and 
post-primary respondents who stated that they had visited the site reporting that they had visited 
this section. This would suggest not only that significant numbers of teachers are already using ICT 
to help them with their lesson planning and preparation work but also that significant numbers are 
keen to vary their teaching resources and to explore new ways of engaging students in lessons. All 
other areas of Scoilnet (except perhaps the post-primary students’ section) proved to be much less 
popular, as can be seen from fig. 4.11. 

Fig. 4.11: The most popular sections of Scoilnet among teachers 

What parts of Scoilnet do you visit? 

Teachers’ Student areas Special needs Schools on-line Parents’ Other 
resources (e.g., exam information 
centre)


Primary 

Post-primary 

Base: All primary (n=859) and post-primary (n=532) teachers who used Scoilnet during the last two years 

In general, Scoilnet achieved high ratings from those who visited it. Fig. 4.12 shows that 82% of the 
858 primary teachers and 67% of the 531 post-primary teachers who rated the site stated that the 
quality of the site’s content was either “good” or “very good.” Furthermore, 78% and 61% of 
primary and post-primary teachers, respectively, rated the relevance of materials to their work or 
interests as “good” or “very good.” Teachers of Mathematics and English at post-primary level 
rated Scoilnet more positively, while teachers of the applied science subjects rated it less positively. 
These teachers expressed disappointment with the relevance to their subject areas of the materials 
available on the site. 

95 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
Fig. 4.12: Teachers’ ratings of Scoilnet 

How do you rate certain elements of Scoilnet? 

[% Good or Very Good] 

Ease of finding relevant Organisation of Quality of the Relevance of materials 
information information content to your work/interests 


Primary 

Post-Primary 

Base: All primary (n=858) and post-primary (n=531) teachers who used Scoilnet during the last two years 

Teachers were of the view that teaching resources (for example lesson plans and class activities) and 
learning resources and materials for use by students were important content items for Scoilnet. Fig. 

4.13 provides details of the level of importance teachers attached to a range of content types. 
81% 
75% 
85% 
76% 
82% 
67% 
78% 
61% 
0% 
20% 
40% 
60% 
80% 
100% 
96 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
Fig. 4.13: Teachers’ views on what Scoilnet should contain 

Top three most important content types 


Teaching resources (e.g., lesson plans, class activities) 
Learning resources/materials for students 
Professional development information 
Educational news and current events 
Educational research 
Academic exchange or discussion 
Job vacancies 

0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 
95% 
88% 
90% 
92% 
45% 
38% 
34% 
33% 
18% 
27% 
17% 
26% 
5% 
4% 
Primary 

Post-primary 

Base: All primary teachers (n=1162) and post-primary (n=800) 

Teachers regarded class-planning materials (for example lesson plans and guidelines) as the most 
important type of teaching resource that Scoilnet should provide. Other teaching resources 
mentioned by primary teachers were assessment materials, classroom management information, 
and project ideas. The majority of other teaching resources mentioned by post-primary teachers 
were related to examinations (for example revision notes and activities, and marking schemes) and 
reviews of educational web sites (by subject). A low level of interest was shown in teacher-only 
forums as a teaching resource. 

In general, the findings suggest that teachers are partial to using the internet to help them with 
their lesson preparation work, and that Scoilnet, and other such web sites, can act as a very helpful 
resource in this respect. It is equally clear, however, that a significant proportion of teachers do not 
exploit the benefits of the internet in preparing for their lessons. These include teachers over thirty-
five, teachers who do not have ready access to appropriate ICT facilities, and teachers (at post-
primary level) of certain subjects. Furthermore, of those who make use of the internet, for example 
for visiting such web sites as Scoilnet, their use is infrequent. It is clear that there is significant scope 
for the further development of the use of ICT in the area of lesson preparation. The continued 
efforts of schools at providing teachers with appropriate access to computers and the internet are 
considered good practice. It is also clear that teachers would like to see more teaching and learning 
resources being made available for downloading, and this is perhaps an area that could be reviewed 
by the NCTE. 

97 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
4.3.3 Planning for using ICT in teaching and learning 
While the use of ICT in planning for teaching and learning was prevalent in most case-study schools, 
planning for the actual use of ICT in the teaching and learning process was not universal, 
particularly in primary schools.50 Where it did occur at post-primary level it was generally confined to 
a small group of subjects. 

Inspectors reported frequently in the inspection reports on case-study primary schools that 
“individual teachers do not generally plan formally for the use of ICT in their classrooms,” or at best 
that “planning for [the] use of ICT appears to be incidental rather than formal.” There were a 
number of reasons for this particular lack of planning, not least being the lack of ICT facilities in 
classrooms or the lack of the ICT skills needed by teachers to integrate the technology effectively in 
their classroom practice. One report, for example, noted: 

ICT is rarely mentioned in the lesson plans in terms of a discrete subject area or for skills development. ICT 
is more likely to appear in teachers’ lesson plans by way of reference to various software packages 
[applications] that support teaching and learning, including those that come with a textbook. It was 
indicated by the teachers interviewed that teachers’ knowledge and confidence in using ICT greatly 
influences the extent to which ICT features in their written preparation and the degree to which they use 
ICT in the classroom. 

At post-primary level, inspectors commented regularly in a positive way on the extent of planning 
for the use of ICT in teaching and learning, but only in the case of certain subject areas. This was 
particularly strong among teachers of the science and applied science subjects and guidance 
counsellors. In one evaluation report it was mentioned that 

in addition to having an input into the school’s ICT plan the teachers interviewed stated that they also 
planned for the use of ICT in their own classes. In this context the use of the internet as a source of 
animations, word processing to produce worksheets and CAD software were mentioned as resources, 
while reference was also made to the use of [careers software] with students. 

In another post-primary school report reference was made to the fact that “informal training and 
collaboration is ongoing between teachers who plan for the use of ICT in their lessons,” and that 
“some of these work across subject divisions.” 

It was also noted in case-study post-primary school evaluation reports that Transition Year, the LCVP 
and the LCA programme all encouraged increased planning for the use of ICT in teaching and 
learning. 

Where limited planning for the actual use of ICT in teaching and learning was observed in schools, 
both primary and post-primary, it was common for inspectors to recommend that this area be 
developed. One primary school evaluation report stated: 

50 For example, only 43 % of the 127 mainstream teachers interviewed by inspectors during their visits to 77 schools reported that their 
planning showed how they intended to use ICT in their teaching. This compares with 69 % who reported that they used ICT to plan 
and prepare for teaching. In the case of the 71 members of special-education support teams interviewed, 57 % stated that their 
planning showed how they intended to use ICT in their teaching. This compares with 61 % who reported that they used ICT to plan 
and prepare for teaching. 

98 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
Teachers reported that personal long-term and short-term planning does not include references to how it 
is intended using ICT to assist the teaching and learning process in the classes. This is an area that the 
teachers should include in future planning. As the number of students is small and the ratio of students 
to computers is generous (two students to one computer in the junior room and five students to one 
computer in the senior room) there is scope for the teachers to promote the use of ICT across a wide 
range of curricular areas using programmes tailored to meet the individual learning needs of the 
students. 

Evaluation reports suggest that where there was ease of access to ICT hardware and software in 
classrooms more frequent use was made of these resources in teaching and learning. It was also 
clear from post-primary evaluation reports that teachers were more likely to use ICT in the teaching 
and learning of those subjects in which there was recent syllabus revision and consequent in-service 
support training. The use of the internet, word-processing programs and CDs distributed during in-
service courses was frequently described. Teachers in the different case-study schools also reported 
that significant time and work were required to identify, find or generate appropriate subject-
specific teaching and learning materials. 

The fact that more teachers use ICT in their planning than plan for the actual use of ICT in their 
teaching suggests that teachers would benefit from training in teaching methods that incorporate 
ICT. This is an area where the NCTE and the relevant support services could assist schools, but it is 
also an area in which the ICT co-ordinator (or teachers who use ICT competently) can play a role. 

4.4 Forward planning 
The national surveys of both principals and teachers asked respondents to state what priorities they 
had identified with respect to the development of ICT in their school (in the case of principals) and 
their classrooms or subjects (in the case of teachers). The responses give an insight into the thinking 
and strategic planning in schools as they move into a future where students’ daily environment 
outside school becomes increasingly dominated by computing technology. 

4.4.1 Principals’ priorities for ICT development 
Through their questionnaire (and the case-study school evaluations) principals identified the 
following issues as important in relation to the development of ICT in their schools: 
• the upgrade and maintenance of existing hardware (primary and post-primary) 
• the integration of ICT in the curriculum (primary and post-primary) 
• the provision of teacher training in ICT (primary and post-primary) 
• the upgrade or provision of internet access and web site presence (primary). 

Tables 4.4 and 4.5 provide samples of comments made by school principals in relation to their 
priorities for ICT development. When these are examined they give a good insight into the range of 
priorities that exist in schools, and into the commitment and far-sightedness of principals. 

99 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
Table 4.4: Primary principals’ views on the strategic development of ICT 

School type and size Comment from principal regarding priorities for development 
Co-educational, large (200+) Broadband; restoration of server after building work; refresher courses for teachers. 
Co-educational, medium (100-199) Computer for each teacher; broadband; school web site. 
Co-educational, large (200+) Encourage teachers to obtain and use material in a more structured way; encourage 
use of internet as a classroom tool, teachers’ familiarity with IT. 
Co-educational, large (200+) Evaluation of current practices and procedures; provision of second computer to 
each classroom; further development of school web site. 
Co-educational, medium (100-199) Expand current provision to upgrade or replace some existing equipment; 
maintenance; networking and broadband completion; web site. 
Co-educational, medium (100-199) In-school in-service day; review ICT plan; update computers; networking; mobile 
projector. 
Co-educational, large (200+) Integration of ICT in various aspects of curriculum; provision of computer in each 
room. 
Co-educational, large (200+) More computers in classrooms; further integration of peripherals; broadband; 
networking; acquire digital projector; integrate ICT in curriculum. 
Co-educational, large (200+) One teacher with responsibility for ICT room; ICT curriculum; web site; maintenance. 
Single-sex, large (200+) Review general plan; acceptable-use policy; up-skilling; encourage greater use by 
all. 
Co-educational, small Staff training; broadband; networking; hardware replacement; support for special(
fewer than 100) needs students. 
Single-sex, large (200+) Teachers’ skills; purchase of suitable software; timetabling of use of computer room. 
Single-sex, medium (100-199) Regular use of computer room; use of data projector as teaching tool; provision of 
laptop for each teacher. 
Co-educational, large (200+) Up-skilling of teachers; make more use of what’s available. 

Table 4.5: Post-primary principals’ views on the strategic development of ICT 

School type and size Comment from principal regarding priorities for development 
Vocational co-educational, Greater use of ICT when teaching subjects not specifically related to ICT; increased 
large (600+) use of ICT as a teaching aid for special-needs students; provision of ICT facilities in 
every teaching area; expansion of ICT facilities in the school library. 
Secondary co-educational, Development of acceptable-use policy; access to, and use of, computers and 
medium (400–599) equipment; details of how ICT can be used to facilitate teaching and learning. 
Secondary single-sex, Extend the network to all classrooms; provision of internet access in each classroom; 
medium (400–599) further computers needed and another computer room. 
Secondary single-sex, large (600+) Promote use of the school’s network (wired and wireless) by staff members; upgrade 
ICT skill levels of staff members; improve access to ICT facilities for all students; 
provide laptop computers to staff members and data projectors for each classroom. 
Secondary single-sex, small ICT support for students with special educational needs; in-service training for 
(fewer than 400) teachers using ICT in subject planning and classroom teaching; technical support 
in-service training; time and resources a continuing requirement. 

100 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
Secondary single-sex, small 

Integration in teaching and learning; extension of community access to ICT 
(fewer than 400) 

facilities; hardware replacement and maintenance. 
Secondary single-sex, medium 

Increased access to ICT facilities for all students; increased use of ICT by all 
(400-599) 

teachers throughout the curriculum; provision of training on site and continuous for 
staff members; making use of ICT the norm rather than for special events. 
Secondary, co-educational, large 

Greater use of ICT in the classroom as part of teaching and learning; provision of 
(600+) 

training and awareness for staff members; drafting of ICT policy; making larger 
number of computers available in classrooms and other teaching areas. 
Secondary co-educational, small 

Structure ICT courses so that each year group receives certification from an 
(fewer than 400) 

appropriate certification body at progressive levels as students’ progress through 
school; connection of broadband and networking of as many classrooms as possible; 
professional development of teachers. 

Community co-educational, large 

Maintenance, access, software, administration; provision of hardware towards 
(600+) 

enhanced teaching and learning environment in classrooms. 
Secondary co-educational, large 

Upgrading hardware; teacher training; installing broadband; integrating computers 
(600+) 

in subject programme areas; finalising a written ICT plan. 

4.4.2 Teachers’ priorities for ICT development 
Through their survey (and through interviews in case-study schools) teachers identified the following 
issues as important to them in relation to the development of ICT in their teaching: 

• the provision of ICT in their classroom: hardware, software, broadband internet access (primary 

and post-primary) 
• teacher training in ICT (primary and post-primary) 
• updating of specific software, particularly for recently qualified teachers (primary) 
• timetabling of ICT lessons (primary). 

Table 4.6 outlines the priority areas identified by the 844 primary and 571 post-primary teachers 
who gave a response to this question. 

101 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
Table 4.6: Teachers’ priority areas for the development of ICT 

Priority Area Number of respondents reporting Proportion of respondents 
this area to be a priority 
Primary Post-primary Primary Post-primary 
Teacher training in ICT 170 80 20.1% 14% 
Improved use of resources in teaching 154 34 18.2% 6% 
Update or obtain (appropriate) software 153 82 18.1% 14.4% 
Hardware or equipment 150 110 17.8% 19.3% 
Integration of ICT in curriculum 127 26 15% 4.5% 
Personal skill development 119 21 14.1% 3.6% 
Teach ICT to students 106 5 12.6% 0.8% 
Improved planning or timetabling 91 14 10.8% 2.5% 
Internet 72 56 8.5% 9.8% 
Facilitate access to ICT, especially in classroom 47 50 5.6% 8.8% 
Information on or reviews of ICT 44 14 5.2% 2.5% 
IT support 43 2 5.1% 0.4% 
Provide or update computer room (primary) 18 15 2.1% 2.5% 
Give access to computer room (post-primary) 
The main priorities of principals were infrastructural in nature, while teachers were more concerned 
with being able to effectively integrate ICT in their teaching. It is also encouraging to see that 
principals and teachers share some of the priorities identified regarding the development of ICT in 
schools, that is, the upgrading of equipment and professional development training. 

4.5 Findings and recommendations 
4.5.1 Main findings 
ICT co-ordination in schools 

• The responsibility for ICT in primary schools can lie with an ICT steering committee, the principal, 
the deputy principal, an ICT co-ordinator, or a combination of these personnel. At the post-
primary level it usually lies with the ICT co-ordinator; all case-study schools had an ICT coordinator. 
ICT steering committees are not prevalent in schools. 

• The evaluation found that greater efficiency was achieved where a named person had the 
responsibility for ICT within a school, and where their role was clearly defined. The duties of the 
ICT co-ordinator were not always clearly defined. 

• Few ICT co-ordinators had opportunities to work with colleagues regarding relevant ICT 
pedagogical issues. 

102 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
• The vision and commitment of the principal contributes significantly to the successful integration 
and development of ICT throughout the curriculum. 

The ICT plan and the AUP 

• The majority of primary schools (71% of survey respondents) have a written ICT plan, while 
fewer than half of post-primary schools (46%) reported having such a plan. 

• The ICT plans tend to concentrate on hardware issues and their organisation rather than on how 
ICT can be used in the teaching and learning context. 

• In those schools that engage in ICT planning there is a greater emphasis on whole-school ICT 
planning than planning for ICT by individual teachers. 

• A variety of practices exists with regard to how schools develop and review their ICT plan. In 
most instances, however, teachers have opportunities to participate in the process. Few schools 
seek or receive support from their local ICT advisor. 

• ICT plans in case-study post-primary schools revealed that limited planning existed with regard to 
dedicated ICT lessons. Best practice was observed where there were comprehensive plans that 
showed continuity and progression in students’ work. 

• Most schools have an AUP (83% and 87% of primary and post-primary survey respondents, 
respectively). This is a product perhaps of the requirements of the Schools Broadband Access 
Programme and the safety awareness-raising initiatives of the NCTE. It can also be taken as an 
indication of the seriousness that schools attach to the risks associated with use of the internet. 

Continuing professional development 

• Approximately 30% of primary schools and 57% of post-primary schools were found to have 
provided their staff with an in-school or external ICT training course within the last three years. 
Primary teachers prefer in-school training, while post-primary teachers expressed a preference for 
tutor-led courses in education centres. 

• Teachers and principals have different priorities regarding the ICT professional development needs 
of staff members. Primary principals suggested courses in the use of digital imaging, in 
peripherals, and also in computer troubleshooting, whereas primary teachers suggested training 
in the use of software-specific applications in the classroom and the use of the internet and email 
in teaching and learning. Post-primary principals, on the other hand, gave priority to training 
for teachers in specific subject areas and in the area of special educational needs. Post-primary 
teachers considered that training was required in the use of educational software, use of the 
internet in teaching and learning, and subject-specific use of ICT. 

103 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
• Teachers who had attended new or revised syllabus in-service courses regularly, particularly post-
primary teachers, commented that they had received little or no training in how to integrate ICT 
in their teaching in the subject concerned. 

Scoilnet 

• While relatively high proportions of teachers use Scoilnet, they do so infrequently. The majority of 
those who do use it, however, rate it highly. The more popular sections of the site include the 
teachers’ resources and students’ areas. 

• Teachers would like to see more teaching and learning resources made available on the site for 
downloading. 

ICT and teacher planning and preparation 

• The majority of teachers use ICT in their lesson planning and preparation work, for example they 
use computers for preparing teaching materials and the internet for finding suitable teaching 
materials. 

• Younger teachers are more likely to use ICT for their lesson planning and preparation than their 
more experienced colleagues. 

• A higher level of use of ICT in lesson planning was found among teachers who had ready access 
to computer facilities and the internet. 

Planning for the use of ICT in teaching and learning 

• Fewer teachers plan for the use of ICT in teaching and learning than use it in their planning and 
preparation for teaching. Planning for its use in the classroom at the post-primary level varies 
considerably, depending on the subject being taught. 

• The Transition Year, LCVP and LCA encourage increased planning for the use of ICT in teaching 
and learning. Teachers of these programmes regularly reported that their involvement also 
encouraged them to use ICT in their teaching with other class groups. 

Priorities for ICT development in schools 

• Principals and teachers in both primary and post-primary schools identified the provision and 
maintenance of hardware and the provision of teacher education in ICT as being strategically 
important with regard to the development of ICT in their school. 

• Principals also felt that the further integration of ICT in the curriculum was important, while 
primary teachers felt that the updating of relevant educational software and the timetabling of 
ICT lessons for students were crucial. 

104 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
4.5.2 Recommendations 
Recommendations for policy-makers and policy advisors 

• The NCTE and relevant support and advisory services should work more closely with schools to 
determine the training needs of staff members and to help them to organise appropriate training 
programmes. Particular attention should be given to organising training courses in teaching 
methods that incorporate ICT. 

• School support services should include more examples of how ICT can be used to facilitate 
teaching and learning in any training programmes they provide. Furthermore, course organisers 
and presenters, when organising courses, should take account of the wide range of ICT abilities 
and experience commonly found in groups of teachers, employing strategies for working with 
mixed-ability groups. 

• The contents of Scoilnet should continue to be developed with a view to making more teaching 
and learning resources available for downloading and to encouraging greater use of this resource 
by teachers. 

• Consideration should be given to conducting a review of the LCVP, LCA and Transition Year with 
a view to learning lessons from these programmes with regard to how they have encouraged 
teachers to use ICT in their lesson planning and preparation and in their teaching. Consideration 
needs to be given at second level to extending the use of ICT for such work in other programmes 
and subjects. 

• ICT co-ordinators in schools should be supported in setting up an association or network of ICT 
co-ordinators. This would act as a forum whereby co-ordinators could share information with one 
another, organise training, and engage with a community of practice and learn from others. 

Recommendations for schools 

ICT co-ordination in schools 

• Schools should, wherever practicable, convene an ICT steering committee, which could assist in 
managing the development of their ICT plan and monitor and review its continuous 
implementation. 

• One member of staff should take the lead in managing and co-ordinating ICT in a school. The 
duties of the co-ordinator, where appropriate, should be clearly defined and regularly reviewed 
and should include a significant emphasis on developing strategies for integrating ICT in the 
curriculum. 

105 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
The ICT plan and the AUP 

• Schools should have an ICT plan. The plan should be formulated by means of a consultative 
process involving teachers and relevant personnel (for example the ICT advisor) and should draw 
from guidelines provided by the NCTE and other support services. 

• A school’s ICT plan should emphasise the use of ICT in teaching and learning, rather than 
concentrating exclusively on the acquisition of equipment or on teachers’ continuing professional 
development in ICT. Ideally it should include guidelines for teachers on setting out appropriate 
learning objectives for each class level in relation to the use of ICT in supporting the 
implementation of the curriculum. 

• Schools should have an acceptable-use policy for computer hardware, software, and the internet. 
The AUP should be drawn up in consultation with all relevant stakeholders and should address all 
users of the technology. 

Continuing professional development 

• Schools should regularly monitor the ICT training needs of their staff and develop and implement 
training plans as appropriate. Training should concentrate on the integration of ICT in teaching 
and learning. 

• Schools should consider liasing with the local education centre and relevant support services for 
the provision of specific courses on site, where possible. The clustering of small schools for the 
purpose of such courses might be explored in certain circumstances. 

ICT and teachers’ planning and preparation 

• All teachers should exploit the benefits to be gained from ICT in their lesson planning and 
preparation. They could endeavour, for example, to make greater use of Scoilnet as part of their 
lesson preparation work. 

• It is recommended that teachers plan systematically for the use of ICT in teaching and learning. 

• Teachers (or subject departments in post-primary schools) should work in collaboration with their 
ICT co-ordinator in identifying and acquiring suitable software resources. 

106 


