

Chapter 3 
31Part 2 
ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
ICT infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools 
Chapter 3 
31Part 2 
ICT infrastructure 
and planning in 
schools 

ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
3.1 Introduction 
The effectiveness of ICT in any school is very much dependent on the quality of the infrastructure 
present. This chapter examines some ICT infrastructural issues in schools. It begins by taking a step 
back from the school itself to look at the ICT advisory service and in particular the degree to which 
schools engage with the service. ICT funding issues are also considered, as schools frequently raised 
the issue of funding during the course of the evaluation. Issues of ICT maintenance, technical 
support and obsolescence are also examined, as well as the levels of access by teachers and 
students to computer and e-mail facilities in schools. 

The number and location of computers in schools is also examined, and the issues that can arise as 
a result are addressed. In this regard reference is made to ICT facilities in areas for use by teachers 
and students as well as ICT in special-education and school administration settings. With regard to 
the post-primary level, specific reference is made to the dedicated computer room and to ICT in 
specialist and general classrooms. Finally, the chapter looks at the availability of ICT peripherals in 
schools, and it concludes by offering some comments on school web sites. 

32 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
3.2 The ICT advisory service 
The ICT advisory service is funded by the NCTE but is managed and implemented by the twenty-one 
full-time education centres around the country. Its objective is to support the implementation of the 
ICT in Schools Initiative (see chapter 1) at the local level and to help build a knowledge base on 
good practice in relation to ICT in schools. 

One element of the advisory service is the provision of one full-time ICT advisor, as well as one ICT 
administrative assistant, in each education centre. The ICT advisors’ role is primarily concerned with 
providing pedagogical advice and support to schools and also (though to a lesser extent) technical 
advice and support. The activities of ICT advisors are monitored by the NCTE. In the national survey 
of teachers a number of questions were asked to elicit views on the level and quality of interaction 
between schools and the advisory service. In addition, the inspectors asked principals, ICT coordinators 
and teachers during all fifty-two case-study school evaluations about the nature of their 
school’s interaction with the advisory service. 

In their questionnaire, teachers were asked if they were aware of the ICT advisory service in their 
local education centre and whether they had availed of it. Fewer than half (48%) of the 1,162 
primary teachers reported that they were aware of the service. Awareness among post-primary 
teachers was even lower, with only 37% of the 800 respondents reporting that they were aware of 
the service. 

The survey found considerable disparity in the awareness levels of teachers (both primary and post-
primary) in different parts of the country. Furthermore, at post-primary level it was found that 
awareness of the service also varied considerably between teachers of different subject areas, with 
the lowest level of awareness recorded among teachers of applied science subjects. 

The survey revealed that 63% of respondent primary teachers were aware that the advisory service 
offered fully funded ICT courses through local education centres. This figure fell to slightly more 
than half (52%) of all respondents at post-primary level. At this level teachers of social studies I 
subjects (History, Geography, Art, Craft and Design and Music) were most aware that such courses 
were offered, with 57% of these teachers reporting this awareness. This group was followed by 
teachers of Mathematics (56%), English (55%), and languages (54%). Teachers of Irish (42%) and 
the applied science subjects (37%) were least aware that the service offered these courses. 

In general, these figures show a substantial variation in levels of awareness among teachers and 
suggest that there is considerable scope for the service to promote itself more vigorously among 
schools. In looking at ways to promote an increased level of awareness of the support it offers, the 
service should consider strategies that are applicable equally to primary and post-primary schools 
and in all regions. At post-primary level, strategies should be inclusive of all teachers, that is, 
irrespective of subject expertise. 

33 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
Of the 48% of primary teachers who reported awareness of the ICT advisory service, some 46% 
(22% of all primary respondents) reported having ever used it. At post-primary level, of the 37% of 
teachers who reported awareness of the service only 41% (15% of all respondents at this level) had 
ever used it. This relatively low level of use among those teachers who were aware of the service 
may be ascribed to a number of factors: 
• insufficient knowledge on the part of teachers of the exact nature of the services offered 
• the relatively small number of ICT advisors, making it difficult for teachers to obtain access to the 

service 
• the distance of some teachers or schools from their nearest education centre 
• lack of time on the part of teachers to engage with the service. 

The survey also asked those teachers who had engaged with the advisory service to rate the service 
they received. It was found, as shown in fig. 3.1, that “information on, and availability of, ICT 
courses” achieved high satisfaction ratings, with 92% of primary and 84% of post-primary teachers 
stating that the quality of the service received was either “good” or “very good.” The quality of the 
“technical advice provided by the ICT advisor” also achieved relatively high satisfaction ratings, with 
76% and 75% of primary and post-primary teachers, respectively, reporting this aspect of the 
service to be “good” or “very good.” The “advice offered by the ICT advisor on classroom use of 
ICT” also achieved respectable ratings, with 68% and 69% of primary and post-primary teachers, 
respectively, rating this aspect as either “good” or “very good.” 

Fig. 3.1: Teachers’ ratings of NCTE and ICT advisory services 

How do you rate the NCTE service which you have availed of? 
[% Good 
or Very Good] 

100% 
80% 
60% 
40% 
20% 
0% 
Information on, and 
92% 
84% 
Technical advice 
76% 75% 
Advice on classroom 
68% 69% 
School visit by ICT 
58% 58% 
availability of, ICT courses provided by ICT Advisor use of ICT provided by ICT Advisor 
Advisor


Primary 
Post-Primary 

Base: All primary teachers who availed of NCTE/local advisory service (n=239) 
All post-primary teachers who availed of NCTE/local advisory service (n=114) 

34 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
“School visits by the ICT advisor” received lower satisfaction ratings. Some 58% of both the 239 
primary and 114 post-primary teachers who reported having availed of this service provided a 
“good” or “very good” rating. The corollary is that 42% of both primary and post-primary teachers 
who had received a school visit felt that the service received was either “fair” or “poor.” This finding 
suggests that the nature of the work undertaken by ICT advisors during school visits should be 
reviewed, perhaps in collaboration with schools themselves, to ensure that the maximum benefit to 
the school and teachers results from each visit undertaken. 

At post-primary level, teachers of the applied science subjects and the social studies II group of 
subjects (Religious Education, Physical Education, CSPE, and SPHE) tended to provide more positive 
ratings for services availed of than teachers of other subjects. Teachers of Business Studies provided 
the lowest ratings, in particular for technical advice, advice on classroom use of ICT, and the school 
visit by the ICT advisor. Given this finding, it would be important for the NCTE and the ICT advisory 
service to ensure that its services at post-primary level take account of the needs of different subject 
teachers. 

The generally low level of awareness of the work of the advisory service was confirmed by the 
findings from the case-study school evaluations. It was common for inspectors to recommend in 
reports that the advisory service be made use of as fully as possible. The majority of the nineteen 
case-study primary school evaluation reports that made reference to the ICT advisory service, for 
example, encouraged schools to liaise more with the service, and other relevant services, particularly 
with regard to advice on ICT planning and staff training issues. One of these reports recommended 
that 

support should be sought from relevant bodies—the local education centre, NCTE and the cuiditheoirí 
attached to the primary curriculum support service (PCSP) and school development planning (SDP) to 
assist the school (i) to provide staff up-skilling in ICT, (ii) to develop a policy on ICT and (iii) to explore ways 
in which ICT may be integrated in teaching and learning in the school. 

Almost half the twenty evaluations conducted at post-primary level made reference to the advisory 
service, and of those that did, approximately half again commented on the relatively low level of 
interaction that existed between the school and the service. One inspector commented: 

There is a relatively low level of interaction with the ICT advisory service available in the local education 
centre. This is surprising given the proximity of the school to the education centre. It is recommended that 
this service be used more extensively. 

In one primary-school report it was also mentioned that the “absence of an ICT advisor in the local 
education centre to support the school and promote ICT projects” was seen as a factor that 
constrained the development of ICT in the school. This also affected local post-primary schools in a 
similar fashion. 

35 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
Notwithstanding the generally low level of engagement by teachers with the advisory service, there 
were examples of satisfaction with the service in some case-study schools. One primary school 
report mentioned that the school had 

engaged the ICT advisor to assist in the use of the data projector in the school. The school has also 
engaged in a project through [the local institute of technology] with the assistance of the ICT advisor. 

One post-primary school was reported as having a “high level of support from the local ICT advisor 
in terms of advice and information, particularly in relation to training courses for teachers.” In 
another post-primary school the reason given for the low level of interaction with the advisory 
service was that ICT provision in the school had progressed to the point where it was felt that the 
support of the service was no longer required. 

An analysis of the surveys of teachers showed that awareness of the advisory service was 
considerably higher among ICT co-ordinators than other teachers, and that ICT co-ordinators also 
tended to avail more often of the service. Table 3.1 shows the differences in the level of use of the 
NCTE and ICT advisory service services between ICT co-ordinating teachers and other teachers in 
both primary and post-primary schools. 

Table 3.1: Awareness and use of NCTE and ICT advisory services among teachers 

Primary schools Post-primary schools 
Teachers who 

Teachers who 

All 

Teachers who 

Teachers who 

All 
were ICT 

were not ICT 

respondent 

were ICT 

were not ICT 

respondent 
co-ordinators 

co-ordinators 

teachers 

co-ordinators 

co-ordinators 

teachers 
Aware of ICT 
advisory service 

81% 

45% 

48% 

84% 

31% 

37% 
Availed of ICT 
advisory service 

63% 

18% 

22% 

61% 

11% 

15% 
Accessed NCTE 
web site in previous 
three years 

69% 

29% 

33% 

82% 

19% 

24% 
Number of teachers26 

115 

938 

1,162 

46 

524 

800 

The high levels of awareness and strong pattern of liaison with the NCTE and the ICT advisory 
service among ICT co-ordinators reflects the nature of the work of co-ordinators in schools. This 
level of communication could be considered an indicator of good practice, and co-ordinators 
should, where relevant, encourage classroom and subject teachers in their schools to engage with 
the NCTE and other relevant services. 

26 A number of teachers did not state whether or not they were ICT co-ordinators in their school. 

36 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
3.3 ICT and funding 
National investment issues pertaining to ICT in education over recent years are described in chapter 1. 
An examination of ICT funding issues in individual schools was not a priority of this evaluation: the 
priorities were more concerned with pedagogical issues. However, schools repeatedly raised the 
issue of funding during the evaluation, particularly in the case-study school evaluations. 

It was clear from the case-study school evaluations that ICT grants received by schools through 
relevant DES schemes had encouraged schools to install or upgrade their ICT systems.27 In particular, 
grants had led to improvements in the quality of facilities available in computer rooms, to an 
expansion in the range of ICT peripherals available, and to the further integration of ICT in teaching 
and learning. School principals repeatedly acknowledged that these grants had facilitated the 
development of their ICT systems, and in a small number of evaluation reports specific mention was 
made of how the grants had been used in developing the school’s ICT infrastructure. Where such 
reference was made inspectors generally noted that effective use had been made of the funds 
received. One evaluation report commented that “it was clear that these grants have been used 
effectively to develop the ICT system in the school.” It was also obvious from evaluation reports, 
however, that not all schools had reached the same level of development. 

A significant number of primary school evaluation reports mentioned that progress had not been 
made towards using the grant made available for networking. In a few reports reasons for such 
delays were cited, such as the school having been approved for a significant building project, while 
in the remainder no reasons for lack of progress were offered. 

While acknowledging the benefits of the grants received, schools generally reported spending more 
on ICT than they received in grants. Evaluation reports regularly referred to how schools had 
augmented the financial support received through the NCTE with private funds; a little less than half 
of the thirty-two primary school evaluation reports, for example, stated that financial assistance for 
the development of their ICT systems was also received from other sources. This issue (referred to 
also in chapter 1) was particularly emphasised in case-study schools during interviews with principals 
and ICT co-ordinators. One post-primary school report commented: 

The school is at an advanced stage in the development of ICT for teaching and learning. The facilities are 
of a high standard and improving. The school’s access to private funds plays a large role in the 
achievements to date, and into the future. 

The most frequently reported source of private funds in both primary and post-primary schools was 
fund-raising by parents’ councils or parents’ groups. Additionally, at primary level it was also 
common for students to become involved in fund-raising activities. Primary schools also reported 
receiving contributions of second-hand ICT equipment from businesses and third-level institutions 
and of equipment received as prizes in competitions. This additional expenditure on ICT displays a 

27 See chapter 1 for details of ICT grant schemes for schools to date, for example, Schools IT 2000 (1998), Blueprint for the Future of ICT 
in Irish Schools (2001), and Networking Schools (2004). These grants were primarily for the purchase of computers and software for the 
development of networking, together with the installation of broadband connectivity. 

37 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
particular commitment by schools to providing students with access to ICT. There is the danger that 
in relying on private funding sources certain schools may be at a disadvantage. Some students, for 
example, are likely to be placed at a disadvantage relative to others if their school community does 
not provide additional funding for its school to purchase computers. The spending of private funds 
by schools on computers could actually be contributing to an exacerbation of the digital divide in 
society. Clearly, the widespread use of private funding suggests that the demand for ICT equipment 
exceeds what can be met from the public grants provided to date. 

3.4 ICT maintenance, technical support, and 
obsolescence 
The problems associated with the lack of technical support and maintenance were commented 
upon strongly in the national survey responses from principals and teachers. These respondents’ 
comments provided an insight into the complexities faced by some schools regarding this issue. One 
principal of a small primary school stated that “the biggest problem encountered is lack of technical 
support. We have to take equipment to the nearest IT company for repair.” Another primary school 
principal mentioned that it was “difficult to access maintenance in an isolated rural area, and it’s 
hugely expensive. The DES should provide back-up in each county that we can use.” One primary 
teacher wrote that, while “all multimedia equipment, laptops and the interactive whiteboard have 
been supplied by the Digital Hub, there should be financial support for its maintenance.”28 This 
comment neatly summarises the fact that for this school the issue was not one of a lack of resources 
but the lack of an efficient way of maintaining them. At post-primary level, one principal of a small 
co-educational vocational school (0–399 students) wrote: 

All of the IT equipment in the school is old (pre-1999) and is constantly giving trouble. We have no 
technical expertise amongst the staff so maintenance is a problem. Teachers are discouraged and 
frustrated and the use of ICT becomes a negative experience for both student and teacher. 

All case-study schools consistently reported that the maintenance, upgrading and technical support 
of their ICT equipment was a cause of great strain, and that these were areas that consumed 
significant amounts of their budget. A little less than half of the thirty-two primary schools 
evaluated had made provision for technical support and maintenance of their hardware, while 
slightly less than half of the twenty post-primary schools visited had a maintenance contract with an 
external contractor. Arrangements at primary level included responsibility for maintaining the ICT 
system resting with the principal, with another member of the staff, or with a member of the board 
of management, or subcontracting maintenance support. Reasons offered by those primary schools 
that had no ICT maintenance scheme included: the cost; the fact that the ICT infrastructure was so 
small that its size did not warrant a formal maintenance scheme; and the fact that no member of 
the staff had the relevant skills or expertise. 

28 The Digital Hub is a Government initiative to create an international centre of excellence for knowledge, innovation and creativity 
concentrated on digital content and technology enterprises. The core development of nine acres is in the Liberties area of Dublin. 
Over the next decade this initiative hopes to create a mixed-use development consisting of enterprise, residential, retail, learning and 
civic space. The project is managed by a Government agency, the Digital Hub Development Agency, established in July 2003. 

38 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
The maintenance contract at post-primary level generally entailed an IT consultant or technician 
devoting one or two days per month to maintaining the school’s ICT system. It was usually the ICT 
co-ordinator in these schools who was responsible for liaising with the contractor. While not ideal, 
primarily because of the lack of a same-day call-out service, such contracts did seem to assist these 
schools in keeping their ICT system intact. In schools that had no contract it was usually the ICT coordinator 
who had responsibility for some, if not all, of the maintenance of the ICT infrastructure. 

Schools with no hardware maintenance system stated that this acted as a significant impediment to 
the development of ICT in their school. Inspectors recommended in these schools that, wherever 
feasible, an ICT maintenance policy be adopted. 

The issue of obsolescence was also found to be a significant problem that schools were required to 
deal with regularly. One post-primary evaluation report stated: 

There is a lot of obsolete or near-obsolete equipment in the school. The laptops seem to be problematic. 
ICT equipment in the year head and deputy principal’s offices are old and largely unused. 

Obsolescence appeared to be a bigger problem at primary than at post-primary level. Inspectors 
made reference to the age of computers in slightly less than half of the thirty-two primary case-
study school reports, compared with only a few post-primary reports. In some primary schools it was 
reported that “most of the desktop computers were dated” or that “some hardware was no longer 
working.” One report mentioned that the “computers in the senior classroom did not appear to be 

39 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
functioning at the time of evaluation,” while in another it was stated that, despite “the considerable 
investment to date, most of the hardware in the school is quite old.” A few reports drew attention 
to the fact that “some software was incompatible with certain computers” because the hardware 
was so old. 

Taken together, these reports paint a picture of schools having computers that, for all practical 
purposes, are obsolete and should be disposed of. These findings are supported by the results of the 
NCTE census (2005), which found that “29% of computers in primary schools, 19% in post-primary 
and 21% in special schools are over 6 years old.” In reports that referred to obsolescence it was 
sometimes stated that this problem could be reduced if computers were used for tasks compatible 
with their specification. In cases, however, where the technical specification of computers rendered 
them unusable, their disposal (in line with proper practice) was usually recommended. The ageing 
profile of hardware, the lack of compatibility between hardware and software and the development 
of network systems bring the issue of technical support and maintenance even more to the fore. 

In general, schools do not have the expertise within their own staffing to maintain their ICT systems. 
Where schools have established maintenance contracts with IT companies, on the other hand, this is 
having a negative impact on their budget and in particular on the level of spending they can afford 
to devote to computer equipment. One principal of a medium-sized (400–599 students) voluntary 
secondary single-sex school responded in the questionnaire: 

The major problem that occurs in the IT area is the need for ongoing technical assistance. One teacher 
(part-time staff member) has an allocation of two hours/week but this is only able to service the basic 
needs of the staff using the rooms and facilities. The school has an IT service provider but this is costly and 
while good service is given it would be so much more efficient to have a technician on site or at least 
shared between two schools. The area of technical support must be assessed and supported if we are to 
progress with increasing use of ICT across the curriculum. 

An appropriate increase in the DES student capitation grant paid to schools or direct grants could be 
used as a means of furnishing schools with an annual ICT upgrading fund. It would be important to 
make sure that such a budget was reserved for this specific use. The purpose of this budget should 
be to deal with ICT obsolescence so as to ensure that the ICT infrastructure is not allowed to 
become outdated. Advice regarding the spending of this annual budget could be sought from the 
NCTE or other relevant agencies. 

It is clear also that the issue of maintenance in schools needs to be addressed in a co-ordinated 
fashion at system level so that all schools can benefit from having a secure and reliable infrastructure 
that will support the integration of ICT throughout the school. A strategy is required to ensure that 
a comprehensive ICT maintenance and support service is available to schools. A range of models 
whereby this service could be delivered needs to be explored. These models could include clustering 
schools for the purpose of taking out maintenance contracts with commercial IT companies, 
national or regional contracts for technical support for schools, or other options. The effectiveness 

40 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
of these models could be explored on a pilot basis initially, so as to identify the most cost-effective 
and efficient way in which the necessary support could be provided to schools. These solutions 
would also require a review of the role and purpose of the local ICT advisory service. 

3.5 Access to computers 
In general, the surveys of teachers found that schools provided both teachers and students with 
high levels of access to computer facilities. 

3.5.1 Access by teachers 
Access by teachers at the primary level, as depicted in fig. 3.2, was primarily provided in the 
teachers’ own classrooms, with 86% of teachers surveyed reporting this to be the case. A similar 
level reported having access to their own computer at home. A little less than a third (29%) of 
teachers, however, reported that access was provided in the staff room. This low figure in respect of 
staff rooms is undoubtedly influenced by the fact that many small primary schools do not have such 
a room. 

Fig. 3.2: Access to computers by primary teachers 

100% 

80% 

60% 

40% 

20% 

0% 

Staff room 
29% 
Classroom Home 
86% 86% 
Base: All primary teachers (n=1162) 

A little less than a quarter of primary schools (24%) were found to provide their teachers with 
computer facilities for use at home (for example a laptop computer). Support of this type was found 
to be slightly higher for teachers of senior classes (29% of senior class teachers) compared with 
teachers of junior classes (21%). Primary teachers also reported that only 10% of classes had access 
to their school’s computers outside class contact hours. 

41 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
Access to computer facilities for teachers at post-primary level, as shown in fig. 3.3, was primarily 
through the staff room (85% of teachers), but a significant proportion (34%) stated that they had 
access in their classroom. When the findings were analysed by subject it was found that access in 
classrooms was highest for teachers of the science subjects (66%), the applied science subjects 
(43%), and Mathematics (41%). Teachers of English (21%), of foreign languages (17%) and of Irish 
(14%) were least likely to have access in their classroom. It would appear that many schools have 
opted to give priority to supplying their specialist classrooms with computer equipment, in 
preference to general classrooms, though the nature of the subjects and the expertise of the 
teachers may also be explanatory factors. 

Fig. 3.3: Access to computers by post-primary teachers 

100% 

80% 

60% 

40% 

20% 

0% 

Base: All post-primary teachers (n=800) 

The survey also found that schools with a low SCR were more likely to provide their teachers with 
access to a computer in their classroom (41%) than schools with a high SCR (30%). It is likely that 
schools with a high SCR concentrate their ICT equipment in one or more areas in the school (for 
example the computer room), as opposed to spreading it thinly throughout the school (for example 
one or two computers in general classrooms). It is also worth noting that 90% of post-primary 
teachers reported using their own home computer for school activities. Support from their schools, 
however, was low, with only 18% of teachers provided with computer facilities by their school (for 
example a laptop for use at home). 

3.5.2 Access by students 
Fifth-year and fifth-class students in all fifty-two case-study schools that participated in the 
evaluation (32 primary, 20 post-primary) were also asked about where they had access to a 
computer. All 437 respondents at primary level, as shown in fig. 3.4, reported having access to 

85% 
Classroom 
34% 
90% 
Home
Staff room 

42 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
computers at school, but access at home was less, at 86%. Access was also reported from other 
places, such as a library or a friend’s or relative’s house. 

Fig. 3.4: Access to computers by fifth-class students 

100% 

80% 

60% 

40% 

20% 

0% 

At home 
86% 
At school At other place(s) 
100% 
78% 
Base: All primary students (n=437) 

More than three-quarters (79%) of the students surveyed at primary level reported that they had 
been using computers for three or more years. Their present usage was reported as being frequent: 
79% reported using a computer at least two or three times a week at home, while 88% reported 
using a computer at least two or three times a week at school. Students reported that computers 
were usually in their classrooms, and that they generally used them individually or in pairs. 

More than four out of five primary students (82%) stated that using a computer helped them with 
their school work. This was mainly through use of the internet for projects. Only 39% reported 
using their home computer to help them with their homework. 

A very high proportion (97%) of the 450 respondent fifth-year students, as shown in fig. 3.5, stated 
that they had access to a computer at school. A high proportion (89%) also stated that they had 
access to a computer at home. Outside of school and home there was also access in other places, 
such as a local library, an internet café, or a friend’s house. 

43 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
Fig. 3.5: Access to computers by fifth-year students 

100% 

80% 

60% 

40% 

20% 

0% 

At school At other place(s)

At home 
89% 
97% 
78% 
Base: All post-primary students (n=450) 

While it can be said that fifth-year students generally have high levels of access to computers in 
school, the survey also found that approximately 50% used a computer in school at least once a 
week. This was slightly lower than computer use at home, where 62% of students reported using a 
computer at least once a week. Interestingly, the survey also found that students in schools with a 
high SCR reported using a computer just as often as students in those schools with a low SCR. 
While this may reflect the fact that computers in post-primary schools are concentrated in computer 
rooms, it would also suggest that although one school may have more computers than another it 
does not directly follow that the former put its extra computers to more productive use. Computers 
in post-primary schools, especially those for the use of students, tend to be located mainly in 
computer rooms. Students’ use of computers, therefore, is more a function of access to a computer 
room than of access to computers per se. In planning the development of their ICT infrastructure, 
post-primary schools need to give due consideration to maximising students’ access to, and use of, 
the facilities. 

44 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
3.6 The use of computers in schools 
The survey of principals revealed that 38% of primary schools had at least one computer room and 
that 62% of schools provided ICT facilities in classrooms only. It also revealed that 10% provided 
such facilities in computer rooms only, while 28% provided these facilities in both classrooms and 
computer rooms. At post-primary level, practically all schools have at least one computer room, and 
traditionally computers in these schools are confined primarily to those rooms. The evaluation 
found, however, that post-primary schools are increasingly moving towards providing other areas 
with computer facilities. 

Inspectors noted the number of usable computers in each of the case-study schools visited. At 
primary level this ranged from four computers in one two-teacher school to forty-eight in a 23teacher 
school. The SCR for the thirty-two schools visited varied significantly, from an optimum of 

2:1 in a small two-teacher school to 16:1 in a five-teacher school. The majority of reports recorded a 
SCR of between 8:1 and 12:1, with the national average for primary schools in 2005 standing at 
9.1:1.29 
The number of usable computers in the twenty post-primary schools visited ranged from 124 in one 
school with an enrolment of 699 students to twenty in a school with an enrolment of 289. The SCR 
varied significantly among these twenty schools, from an optimum of 3.7:1 in a small community 
school (fewer than 399 students) to 14.4:1 in a small secondary school. The majority of reports 
recorded a SCR of between 5.2:1 and 8.4:1, with the national average for post-primary schools in 
2005 standing at 7:1. 

In planning for the use of ICT in schools, the location of computers is important.30 Sections 3.6.1 
and 3.6.2 of this report provide an overview of the organisation of ICT facilities in the case-study 
schools visited, as well as an overview of the issues that arise as a result. They draw predominantly 
on information obtained from the case-study schools evaluated but also on the responses to the 
national surveys of principals. 

3.6.1 Organisation of ICT facilities in case-study primary schools 
ICT facilities were found in computer rooms, classrooms, staff rooms, administrative areas, school 
libraries and general-purpose rooms in the case-study primary schools evaluated. The level of 
permeation of ICT in classrooms was described by inspectors as being “in all classrooms” in twenty-
two of the thirty-two schools visited, in the “majority of classrooms” in five schools, in “some 
classrooms” in one school, and “non-existent” in the classrooms of four schools. 

29 See NCTE 2005 Census on ICT Infrastructure in Schools: Statistical Report (July 2006), page 3, table 4. The SCR in primary schools for 

2000 was 16.3:1, while in 2002 it stood at 11.2:1. As can be seen, there has been an improvement on the SCR in schools between 2000 

and 2005. 

30 The installation of computers in new schools is governed by the department’s technical guidance documents. These are Information 

and Communications Technology (ICT) Infrastructure Guidelines for Primary Schools (TGD 004), February 2004, and Information and 

Communications Technology (ICT) Infrastructure Guidelines for Post-primary Schools (TGD 005), February 2004. Both documents can 

be found at www.education.ie. 

45 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
ICT facilities in areas for students’ use 

Eleven of the thirty-two case-study primary schools had one dedicated computer room each. 
Enrolment in these schools varied between 121 and 624 students. Of the twenty-one schools that 
did not have a computer room, enrolment varied from 14 to 209 students. Computer rooms, 
therefore, tended to be found in the larger of the primary schools visited. 

The number of computers found in computer rooms varied from a minimum of ten to a maximum 
of twenty-one networked computers. A few small schools had placed all their computers in a 
dedicated area, which they referred to as the “computer room.” In these cases the number of 
computers was generally six or less, and usually they were not networked. The reasons for such 
consolidation of facilities usually concerned lack of space, with one report stating that the “school 
originally located the computers in the two classrooms, but because of limited space it was decided 
to relocate them to the staff room.” Because of the lack of a suitable area for use as a computer 
room, one school placed eight networked computers in a mainstream classroom; an ICT specialist 
teacher directed lessons on these computers while the class teacher taught as normal in the room. 
In another situation the computer room was used for a range of purposes: 

While the timetable facilitates use of the computer room by teachers, there are a number of constraints 
that adversely affect its use. Among these is the multi-purpose use of the room to accommodate the 
school secretary, learning-support teaching, resource teaching and the principal’s administration duties. 

A few schools with a computer room had timetables that generally governed when class groups got 
to use the room. However, this also governed when other groups did not get to use the room. One 
report, for example, stated that “a timetable is provided which allows all mainstream classes, apart 
from infants, at least weekly access to the computer room.” In another school it was reported that 

students in middle and senior classes leave their classroom in groups to use the computers from time to 
time. Students in first and second class occasionally use the computers in the afternoon, when the infant 
students have gone home. 

In another report there was clear evidence of restricted use of the computer room: 

The computers in the computer room are used by the senior classes only and appear to be in regular use. 
The other mainstream teachers or students do not generally use the computer room. As there are no 
computers in either the junior or middle classroom, this means that students do not begin consistent 
computer use until third class. 

With regard to three schools inspectors recommended that the timetable for the computer room be 
reviewed with a view to providing more students with access. Schools were encouraged to develop 
a booking system (for example a notice or rota on the notice-board in the staff room) for the use of 
the computer room whereby teachers could book the room to take class groups at particular times. 
In their national survey, 51% of principals felt that the main advantage of having a computer room 

46 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
was that it allowed concurrent access to the computers for whole classes. Interestingly, 32% of 
principals also felt that it was a more conducive environment for learning ICT than the classroom. 

Most case-study primary schools had some level of ICT facilities in each of their classrooms. One 
report pertaining to a five-teacher school, for example, stated that “there are seven computers 
shared between mainstream classrooms,” while the report on a thirteen-teacher school noted that 
there were “over twenty computers in good repair, but of varying age, located in mainstream 
classrooms.” 

In general, the distribution of computers in classrooms varied significantly from school to school. 
There was no clear pattern as to how schools decided to distribute their computers, as some 
classrooms had generous levels while others had limited supplies. In schools where computers were 
located in classrooms only, however, reports did reveal that access to, and use of, the technology 
was more relaxed and more frequent. One report stated: 

Teachers reported that all students had access to, and made use of, computers. This was assisted by the 
fact that computers are located in each of the classrooms in the school. All students have access to the 
computer on a weekly basis . . . a computer rota system is used in classrooms to ensure that all students 
access the computer. Files of individual students’ work are maintained on the hard disk of the classroom 
computers. 

In their survey, principals reported that, from a teaching and learning viewpoint, the advantages of 
having computers in classrooms were threefold: 
• there is convenient and flexible access 
• it is easier to supervise, control and assist students 
• individual attention can be managed more easily, especially for special-needs students. 

Computers in classrooms, however, were not always organised optimally. One case-study school 
report commented: 

The organisation of the school’s ICT infrastructure, particularly within individual classrooms, should be 
reviewed to accommodate further development of students’ writing skills through the writing process, 
the development of collaborative skills through project work and the development of research skills 
through the use of the internet. 

The issue of infrastructural layout in primary school classrooms and how it impacts on teaching and 
learning is explored in greater detail in chapter 5. 

From the case-study schools evaluated it seems that while the computer room might be a more 
efficient way of managing the computers in a school it does not always guarantee regular access to 
the technology by students. It is also clear that the computer room can sometimes be used for 
different purposes. It would appear that locating computers in classrooms provides greater access 
opportunities for students. 

47 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
Most case-study school reports recorded information about the internet connection that schools 
were using. Only one report made explicit reference to a working broadband connection. Most of 
the remainder were connecting with a dial-up system, while in a few instances it was reported that 
there was no access to the internet at all. In these reports it was stated that the relevant schools 
were awaiting broadband connection before re-establishing an internet connection. 

Internet connection in schools, where it did exist, appeared to be limited to one computer. This 
restricted students’ access, with one report stating that “internet access is strictly reserved for staff 
[members] or for supervised groups of students.” The lack of access to the internet in the classroom 
was regarded by many teachers as a barrier to the successful integration of ICT in their teaching. As 
one inspection report stated, “there is currently no internet access in any of the five classrooms 
which [the] staff identifies as a barrier to the development of the students’ ICT skills.” 

Case-study schools were generally found to have restricted access to the internet. It was regularly 
recommended in reports that schools upgrade their level of internet access for both students and 
teachers. It is expected, however, that this situation will improve with the provision of broadband 
and the networking of computers that was taking place at the time of school visits. 

ICT facilities in special-education settings 

ICT facilities comprising at least one computer were located in special-education settings in the 
majority of case-study primary schools. In one school the allocation was particularly good, with two 
special-education teachers having 

the use of three computers together with two printers and two scanners. Two students with specific 
learning needs have access to individual laptop computers. 

Case-study schools regularly acknowledged the benefits that DES grants had in providing dedicated 
technology for special education needs. A few reports, for example, noted that special-education 
teachers had access to laptop computers for their work. One report referred to “the learning-
support and resource teachers who provide support to the school on a shared teaching basis” 
having laptops for use in various schools within their cluster. In another report it was noted that 
“there are also two laptops available which are mainly used by teachers who support students with 
additional learning needs.” 

Commercially produced educational software was always used to facilitate teaching and learning in 
special-education settings. Some schools had “a commendable range of software packages that 
[were] used regularly to support students,” while others had to make do with less. In the latter case 
the schools were usually advised to expand their level of software resources. (Software issues are 
discussed further in section 3.8.) 

48 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
ICT in areas for teachers’ use 

Fifteen of the thirty-two case-study primary schools had computers available in their staff room that 
were primarily for use by teachers. The number of such computers ranged from one to five. 

While more than half the case-study schools did not provide computers in areas specifically for 
teachers’ use, it is recognised that many of these were small schools that did not have a staff room 
in the first place. In those schools it was usually reported that the teachers had the use of those 
computers that were also used by the students (i.e. those in a computer room or in classrooms). 

The majority of computers in schools that were specifically designated for teachers’ use only were 
laptops. The learning-support/resource teacher featured prominently in this regard. As will be seen 
in chapter 4, school management personnel and teachers regularly spoke of how access to such 
facilities contributed to improvements in the quality of lesson planning, preparation, and content. 

ICT in school administration 

The NCTE infrastructure census (2005) found that 95% of primary schools used computers for 
general office use, 60% used the technology for maintaining students’ records, and 48% used 
computers for accounts work. In this evaluation it was found that only fifteen of the thirty-two case-
study schools visited reported making use of computers in school administration work. The number 
of computers devoted to this work was usually one or two. Of the twelve schools that reported 
devoting two computers to this work, one was usually earmarked for the school secretary, while the 
other was for the principal. Schools should fully exploit the benefits presented by ICT in school 
administration. 

3.6.2 Organisation of ICT facilities in case-study post-primary 
schools 
A general pattern emerged from the visits made to post-primary case-study schools regarding how 
they organised their ICT facilities. Each of the twenty schools visited, for example, had at least one 
computer room.31 As already noted (section 3.5), outside of computer rooms schools tended to give 
priority to supplying computers to specialist classrooms and workshops over general classrooms. The 
level of permeation of ICT in learning spaces in the case-study post-primary schools was described 
by inspectors as being “in all classrooms” (both specialist and general) in two schools visited. ICT 
was found to have permeated the “majority of classrooms” in one school, while it was reported to 
have permeated “some classrooms” in fifteen schools. ICT was reported to be “non-existent” in the 
classrooms of two of the twenty schools visited. Computers featured prominently in areas that were 
dedicated to working with students with special education needs. Facilities were also provided in 
some schools for the exclusive use of teachers, in staff rooms or other such areas where teachers 
could undertake planning and preparation work. ICT facilities were also used in school 
administration areas. 

31 Eleven schools had one computer room, one school had two computer rooms, five schools had three computer rooms, and three 
schools had four computer rooms. 

49 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
The dedicated computer room 

The provision in post-primary schools’ schedules of accommodation of a dedicated computer room, 
now often referred to as the multimedia learning laboratory, is a relatively new initiative. Up to 1999 
most schools were provided with a room for “commerce or business machines” in their schedules of 
accommodation. These rooms were generally equipped with typewriters. From 1999 onwards, 
however, computer rooms were formally provided, though before that many schools had converted 
existing classrooms to serve as computer rooms. 

The computer room is generally used for teaching computer skills to full class groups. The computer 
room in a new school is generally equipped with seating for up to thirty computer users, with 
computer hardware being allocated per capita.32 While the total number of computers in the 
computer rooms of the case-study schools visited varied significantly, the number found was not 
always in proportion to the school’s enrolment. One school with an enrolment of 289 students, for 
example, was found to have only fifteen computers in its computer room; another, with an 
enrolment of 397 students, had eighty-eight computers in its computer rooms; a third, with an 
enrolment of 628, had seventy-six computers; while a fourth, with an enrolment of 699, had ninety 
computers between its four computer rooms. The average number of computers in the computer 
rooms of case-study schools was twenty-four. With regard to rooms with an above-average number 
of computers inspectors usually commented that such schools had a “generously equipped” or 
“well-equipped” computer room. The proviso was usually added, however, that the equipment was 
not always up to date. 

Inspectors found that most of the case-study schools had availed of DES funding to either create or 
develop the computer network in their school.33 It was found, for example, that almost all the 
schools visited had a network system in their computer room (or rooms), but a few computer rooms 
also included a number of stand-alone computers. Almost all the network systems installed were 
wired, though one report referred to a school having a wireless network. While no network was 
installed in a small number of schools visited, it was reported that those schools had plans to have 
one installed. Approximately a quarter of the schools visited had two or more networking domains, 
one usually administrative, the other devoted to use by the students. One school had four 
networking domains, but the report on this school recommended the consolidation of these 
networks so that “all computers, with the exception of those used in administration, are on the 
same network and have access to the internet.” 

The introduction of the broadband initiative was still in progress at the time of the case-study school 
visits. In some schools it was reported that broadband access was already available, while others 
were in the process of acquiring such access. Nevertheless, all the schools visited had some form of 
internet access. In one school only one computer had internet access, but in all other schools 
students had access to the internet via the school’s computer network. Teachers interviewed 
reported the internet as being a very valuable teaching resource. In particular, they felt that the 

32 See www.education.ie for layouts and specifications for new computer rooms. 
33 See chapter 1 for details of DES grants to schools. 

50 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
internet allowed for a wide range of digital resources to be brought into the classroom for activities 
in which the students did their own research or engaged in interactive activities on-line. (This issue is 
explored in greater detail in chapter 6.) 

Almost all the case-study school reports referred to the timetabling arrangements for the computer 
room (or rooms). Approximately half the reports quantified the time for which computer rooms 
were timetabled; occupancy ranged from 30% to almost 90%, with the average being slightly more 
than 60%. In schools where the timetabled occupancy was low it was generally reported that this 
was to allow teachers to use the room and its facilities as the need arose. However, there was 
regular mention during interviews with teachers that the practicalities involved in taking a group of 
students to a computer room tended to discourage them from doing so. Furthermore, a few ICT coordinators 
spoke of problems that tended to arise when there was unplanned use by teachers of the 
school’s computer room (for example technical problems, breakage, and tampering with systems). 
For subject teachers to make greater use of computer rooms, school managements would need to 
ensure that a simple and accessible system exists for booking the room. Such a booking system did 
not exist in many of the case-study schools visited; approximately a quarter of all evaluation reports 
referred to the need for some form of booking system to be implemented. It is also important that 
rules for the computer room are established and that these are regularly brought to the attention of 
all teachers and students who use the room. 

ICT facilities in specialist and general classrooms 

While a computer room is normally used for teaching computer skills to an entire class group, 
computers in specialist or general classrooms are generally intended to support the use of ICT as a 
teaching aid for subjects. ICT was found in one or more of the specialist rooms in the case-study 
schools visited. Specialist rooms in which such facilities were commonly found included science 
laboratories and technology workshops, along with those rooms dedicated to Art, Craft and Design, 
Music, Geography, Career Guidance and Home Economics. In most reports in which the number of 
computers in specialist rooms was given it was noted that they contained only one or two 
computers. In one report, however, it was noted that a science laboratory contained six computers. 
This level of provision allowed for the potential use of the computers by small groups of students. 
The more common situation of having a single computer in a room generally meant that it was used 
either solely by the teacher or in rotation by students, either in pairs or individually. Most school 
libraries were also equipped with some ICT equipment. 

In contrast with specialist rooms, the permeation of computers in general classrooms was found to 
be more limited. Only two of the twenty case-study schools were found to have computers in all 
their general classrooms. Of the remaining eighteen schools, each principal generally expressed the 
view that they would like to see this level of permeation of ICT throughout their school in the years 
to come. The majority of principals who responded to the questionnaire also expressed this view in 
the context of their vision for the development of ICT in their school. One principal, for example, 
identified the following priorities: to increase the incidence of ICT usage by the teaching staff; to 

51 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
support and up-skill teachers in ICT usage; and to put ICT hardware and software in place in 
classrooms. 

Of these eighteen schools, one was described as having computer facilities in the “majority” of 
general classrooms, while fifteen had computers in “some” general classrooms. In only two of the 
schools visited was it reported that there were no computers in any general classrooms. In their 
evaluation reports it was common for inspectors to recommend an expansion, as resources 
permitted, of the number of computers made available to general classrooms. A few reports advised 
schools to consider, as an interim measure, setting up a mobile ICT facility that could be shared 
between classrooms. 

ICT facilities and special needs 

The level of provision of ICT equipment in the area of special educational needs varied considerably 
from school to school at post-primary level. A few reports commented on the high level of provision 
of ICT for use in this area. One report, for example, commented that “the learning support and 
resource areas are particularly well catered for,” while another noted that “the learning-support 
room has twelve laptop computers.” Conversely, one report spoke of the special-education teachers 
having only “a desktop computer and a printer.” In addition to the availability of computers and 
peripherals, a few reports also referred to the provision of software in this area. One report referred 
to the availability of “an extensive library of educational software for use with special needs 
students,” while another noted that “educational software is confined predominantly to the area of 
special needs education.” (Further reference is made to the issue of computer software in special 
education in section 3.8.) 

ICT facilities in staff rooms 

Schools that made dedicated computer facilities available for teachers’ use reported that it 
encouraged the teachers to engage with the technology and that it also led to improvements in the 
quality of the resources used in teaching. The survey of teachers (as mentioned in section 3.5) found 
that 85% used computers in the staff room for school-related activities. Of the case-study schools 
visited, approximately a quarter provided one or two computers in the staff room, a quarter 
provided between three and five computers, while approximately another quarter provided more 
than ten computers for the use of the staff. In a few schools some or all of the teachers were 
provided with their own laptops; one school reported that they intended to extend this facility to 
students. In a few schools it was reported that teachers used computers in the computer room for 
lesson planning and preparation purposes; and in schools that had computers in classrooms it was 
reported also that the teachers based in such classrooms generally used these for planning and 
preparation purposes. 

ICT in school administration 

Most evaluation reports on case-study schools made reference to the level of ICT equipment in 
administrative areas. In this regard the inspectors noted the use of ICT equipment in the offices of 

52 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
school secretaries, of senior and middle school management personnel, and of guidance counsellors 
and chaplains. It was noted that computers used for administrative purposes were usually on a 
separate network from those available for academic use. The NCTE infrastructure census (2005) 
found that 59% of post-primary schools had a separate network for school administration. This is 
considered good practice, as it affords a higher level of security for sensitive school data. 

While not all post-primary schools use computer applications to construct their annual timetables,34 
all the case-study schools visited were found to do so. Indeed the majority of case-study schools 
were also found to use suitable applications to keep detailed information on students; the NCTE 
infrastructure census (2005) found that 94% of post-primary schools used ICT for this purpose. 
Schools found this computerisation of students’ records to be of particular benefit when liaising 
with parents on such issues as behaviour, academic progress, and attendance and punctuality, as the 
school was in a position to obtain accurate information quickly. With regard to attendance and 
punctuality in particular, a few of the schools that were visited implemented a computerised student 
attendance system, whereby students were required to check in each morning using their own 
swipe card. While such a system has certain loopholes, these schools reported that the system had a 
positive influence on attendance and punctuality patterns. 

During interviews a few school principals spoke of the need for appropriate ICT training to be 
provided for personnel in the efficient use of computers in school administration. The Education 
Services Initiative (ESI) of the DES should extend schools’ use of ICT in its administrative work.35 

3.7 ICT peripherals 
Teachers were asked in their national surveys what peripherals they used in their teaching and how 
often they used them. The range of peripherals used and the extent of their use are shown in fig. 

3.6 and fig. 3.7 for primary and post-primary schools, respectively. 
34 As evidenced by (a) the NCTE infrastructure census (2005), which found that 89 % of post-primary schools used computers to 

construct their timetables, and (b) the fact that some schools continue to make their October returns to the DES with conventional 

methods. October returns comprise details of enrolments that schools return to the Department of Education and Science at the 

beginning of October each year. 
35 The purpose of the ESI is to develop a web-based “one-stop shop” portal and specific applications for providing on-line services to 

schools, replacing paper-based systems. The first application to be developed under this project is the On-Line Claims System. Other 

services will be developed in a number of phases. 

53 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
Fig. 3.6: Frequency of use of ICT peripherals by primary teachers 

How frequently do you use the following peripherals/equipment in 
your teaching? 

Printers 
Digital still cameras 
Scanners 
Digital video cameras 
Data projectors - mobile 
MP3 players 
Data projectors - fixed 
Interactive whiteboards 

80%60% 100%40%20%0% 
22%43% 16% 
14% 33% 
12% 23% 
12% 
10% 
At least once a week 
About 2/3 times a month 
Less than twice a month 

Base: All primary teachers (n = 1162) 

Fig. 3.7: Frequency of use of ICT peripherals by post-primary teachers 

Printers 
Scanners 
Data projectors - mobile 
Digital still cameras 
Data projectors - fixed 
Digital video cameras 
Datalogging sensors 
Dataloggers 
Interactive whiteboards 

How frequently do you use the following peripherals/equipment in 
your teaching? 

40%30% 50% 60%20%10%0% 
12%33% 13% 
11% 10% 17% 
9% 6% 12% 
3% 6% 17% 
13% 4% 
2% 9% 
2% 8% 
2% 8% 
3% 
6% 
At least once a week 
About 2/3 times a month 
Less than twice a month 

Base: All post-primary teachers (800) 

54 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
Printers were found to be the most commonly used ICT peripherals in both primary and post-
primary schools: 65% of primary and 45% of post-primary teachers reported making use of a 
printer at least two or three times per month. The use of the printer at primary level was higher 
among teachers of senior classes (72%). 

The next most frequently used peripherals at primary level were digital cameras and scanners, both 
being used at least two or three times a month by 19% of teachers. Again, the use of these 
peripherals was found to be higher among teachers of senior classes (25%). 

Data projectors (fixed or mobile), scanners and digital (still) cameras were the next most commonly 
used peripherals at post-primary level. When the data was analysed by subject area at post-primary 
level it was found that a relatively low proportion of teachers of Irish used ICT peripherals in 
comparison with teachers of Mathematics and the science and applied science subjects. Interactive 
whiteboards were uncommon in both primary and post-primary schools. 

While significant numbers of teachers at both primary and post-primary level use printers, the 
general use of peripherals is quite low. For example, 19% of primary teachers and 42% of post-
primary teachers reported never using a printer in their teaching, while approximately 50% of 
primary teachers and more than 70% of post-primary teachers reported never using a digital still 
camera in their teaching. 

In the primary case-study schools, printers were also the predominant peripheral. In one five-teacher 
school in particular there were sixteen printers, while its only other piece of peripheral equipment 
was a digital camera. The prevalence of printers in primary schools, however, raises questions 
relating to how schools make decisions concerning the purchase of peripherals, and how they meet 
their needs while at the same time ensuring that good value is received. It would appear that 
primary schools in particular need advice regarding the purchase of ICT peripherals. Indeed some 
evaluation reports made recommendations concerning ICT peripherals. These usually encouraged 
schools to consider expanding their level of ICT peripherals. Data projectors featured strongly in such 
recommendations, as they were present in less than a third of the case-study schools visited, almost 
exclusively the larger schools. Scanners and digital cameras closely followed data projectors. 

Post-primary case-study schools reported making regular use of printers and data projectors and, to 
a lesser extent, scanners, digital cameras, digital camcorders, data-logging equipment, and CD 
writers. Reference was constantly made during evaluations to one of these peripherals in particular, 
namely the data projector. Teachers viewed the data projector as a tool that could significantly 
enhance the teaching and learning process. Many described how the projector could “bring the 
subject matter to life” through, for example, multimedia presentations (i.e. presentations that 
include a combination of effects, such as animation, music, and text). It was also regularly described 
as being a “visually effective tool,” particularly from the students’ viewpoint, because of the larger 

55 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
screen it facilitates. Finally, the majority of teachers interviewed mentioned that using the data 
projector also allowed them more time to engage with students, as opposed to having to spend 
time writing or drawing on the blackboard. In a few schools it was reported that one or more data 
projectors were mobile, thus facilitating their use by greater numbers of teachers in their own 
classroom environments. 

In more than a quarter of the evaluation reports for post-primary case-study schools the inspectors 
recommended the purchase, as funds became available, of additional data projectors. In some cases 
it was recommended that the projectors be mobile, so that they could be moved from classroom to 
classroom as required, or that a specific room be equipped with a data projector so that teachers 
could bring their students to that room as required. Such alternative arrangements would be made 
in accordance with a school’s particular circumstances. Given the undoubted benefits of using a 
data projector to facilitate teaching and learning, it is clear that every classroom should ideally have 
access to this equipment. 

3.8 Software 
Teachers in all the case-study schools visited reported making use of software as a teaching aid. The 
most popular type of software used at primary level was content-rich.36 Exploratory37 and reference 
software (for example encyclopaedias) were also available, but to a more limited extent. The most 
popular type at post-primary level was subject-specific software; this was particularly so in the case 
of special-education teachers (see section 3.6.2). The availability of these types of software, 
however, varied considerably from school to school. 

In general, it was found that only limited areas of the primary school curriculum were supported by 
software. A few reports from the case-study schools mentioned software being available for 
particular curricular areas only. The more popular areas supported by software were the Visual Arts, 
Music, and Social, Environmental and Scientific Education (SESE). In the area of SESE, History and 
Geography were the more popular areas supported by software. Irish was the least-supported area. 
Only one school report mentioned that Irish was supported through the use of software, while 
another mentioned that “a satisfactory range of content-rich software is provided for most areas of 
the curriculum with the exception of Irish.” All reports, however, mentioned that software was 
regularly used to help develop students’ literacy and numeracy skills. It is of interest also that a small 
number of reports made mention of the lack of software available in schools, despite grants being 
provided for the purchase of equipment, peripherals, and software. 

It was clear that many teachers in both primary and post-primary schools were unaware of the 
range of software already available to them in their school. Many inspectors recommended, 
therefore, that schools develop an inventory of the software, and in some cases hardware also, 

36 Content-rich software can also be described as tutorial-based software, usually subject-specific and with little or no interactivity. 
37 Simulation-type software, usually subject-specific but with a high level of interactivity. 

56 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
already available in the school. It was further recommended that these inventories be circulated to 
teachers so as to create a greater awareness of the ICT facilities readily available to them. It was also 
seen as important that such inventories be regularly updated. 

A few reports, particularly for post-primary schools, suggested that a tracking system be developed 
for the movement of ICT facilities within schools. It is also worth noting that, of the teachers who 
reported having limited software resources, many admitted to not having submitted a request for 
such software to their school management. In light of this fact it is recommended that teachers or 
their subject departments (post-primary) draw up a list of software resources, perhaps annually and 
in collaboration with their school’s ICT co-ordinator, that would be suited to the teaching and 
learning in their classroom or subject (or subjects). The list should then be submitted to the 
management of the school for consideration. 

During interviews with teachers in case-study schools many of those who were members of their 
school’s special-education team raised the issue of the appropriateness of the match between the 
equipment and software they used and the needs of their students. Many reported that they lacked 
an awareness of what support was available and how they could acquire it. This is an area in which 
the NCTE, in collaboration with the Special Education Support Service (SESS), could assist schools 
even further, particularly with regard to advising them on the range and type of devices and 
software available for use with students with special educational needs. There is an opportunity 
here, perhaps, to disseminate the outcome of such projects as Solas38 and the Laptop Initiative.39 

3.9 Use of e-mail 
The first NCTE census of ICT infrastructure in schools (2002) found that 16% of teachers in primary 
schools and 23% in post-primary schools were provided with a personalised e-mail account by their 
school. By 2005 these figures had risen to 35% and 30%, respectively.40 In the national surveys 
used as part of this evaluation it was found that a little more than a third of teachers in both primary 
(35%) and post-primary (34%) schools were provided with an e-mail address by their school. At 
primary level in particular the proportion was higher for male teachers (45%), teachers over thirty-
five (45%), teachers in schools with a low SCR (40%), and teachers of senior classes (43%). 

38 SOLAS was an education research project, launched in 1997 and funded by the NCTE, aimed at meeting the special educational 
needs of pupils with physical and sensory impairments, especially in mainstream education. The project involved the publication of a 
document entitled Enabling Technologies: Guidelines for the Use of Assistive Technology in Education. More information on this 
project can be found at www.enabletech.ie. 

39 This initiative was launched in 2000 and was aimed at identifying how laptop computers could best be used to support second-level 
pupils with dyslexia or other reading difficulties in inclusive environments. The initiative provided grants for the purchase of laptops 
for individual pupils and for the purchase of back-up equipment in each of the thirty-one schools involved. Specialist training for 
teachers involved in the project in these schools was also provided. The initiative was completed in 2005, and a book and CD entitled 
Engaging Learners: Mobile Technology, Literacy and Inclusion were published the following year. Further details on the initiative are 
available on a special web site, www.laptopsinitiative.ie. 

40 See NCTE (2006), NCTE 2005 Census on ICT Infrastructure in Schools: Statistical Report. 

57 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
Despite the level of provision of e-mail for teachers, it was found that considerably fewer reported 
using e-mail for class-related activities. Only 7% of all teachers at primary level and 8% at post-
primary level reported using e-mail with students as part of class-related activities. At primary level, 
use in class was found to be higher for senior classes (14%) and for male teachers (13%). At post-
primary level, when the findings are examined by subject area, as shown in fig. 3.8, some 
differences become apparent. 

Fig. 3.8: Provision and use of e-mail address by subject taught, post-primary schools 

E-mail address provision and usage by subject taught 

60% 
40% 
20% 
0% 
39% 
2% 
37% 
11% 
35% 
10% 
33% 
6% 
32% 32% 32% 
9% 8% 8% 
27% 
5% 
26% 
4% 
Irish Business Foreign Mathematics Social Social Applied English Science 
Studies Languages Studies I Studies II Science 


Has your school provided you with an e-mail address? 
Do you use e-mail with your students for class related activities? 

Base: All post-primary students (n=800) 

The provision of e-mail addresses to post-primary teachers was highest for teachers of Irish (39%), 
Business Studies (37%) and foreign languages (35%). One reason for this could be that teachers of 
these subjects, particularly the language and business studies subjects, are likely to be engaged in 
projects that involve communication with businesses, with other schools, or with teachers in 
different countries. Interestingly, these categories of teachers did not feature highly among those 
teachers who had access to computers in their classrooms. A slightly lower proportion of English 
teachers (27%) and teachers of science subjects (26%) received an e-mail address from their school. 

Teachers of Business Studies, foreign languages and subjects in the social studies I group of subjects 
(History, Geography, Music and Art, Craft and Design) were found to be the best users of e-mail for 
class-related activities. Teachers of Mathematics, English and Science had a relatively low proportion 
of e-mail use, while use among teachers of Irish was lowest. In general, it can be said that the 
provision of e-mail is not always synonymous with its use. 

58 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
Not surprisingly, the survey found a correlation between use in class and the provision of an e-mail 
address by a school. At primary level, 11% of teachers in schools that provided their teachers with 
an e-mail address used e-mail with their students, compared with 7% nationally; at post-primary 
level the corresponding figures were 13% and 8%. Given the fact (as noted earlier) that slightly 
more than a third of teachers at both levels are provided with e-mail addresses by their schools, it is 
clear that many teachers are using their own e-mail address with their students. However, when 
schools provide this facility for their teachers its use is greatly increased. 

Teachers who used e-mail reported that it presented opportunities to communicate with other 
teachers and schools, with parents, with industry, and with the local community. It provided 
opportunities to enhance teaching and learning. Popular examples of the use of e-mail at both 
primary and post-primary level included e-mailing other students as part of school twinning projects 
and requesting information from companies or agencies for research purposes. Communication 
with companies regarding work experience was also popular at post-primary level. 

The provision of a dedicated e-mail service to schools and their teaching staff should be given 
priority within the introduction of the NCTE-managed Schools Broadband Access Programme. With 
regard to those schools and teachers who are already provided with such a facility, efforts could 
perhaps be directed towards encouraging its use as part of classroom practice. 

3.10 The on-line environment 
3.10.1 The learning platform 
While it is known that some schools make use of their own on-line learning platform, the evaluation 
found no evidence of such platforms being used in any of the case-study schools visited. Learning 
platform is an umbrella term that describes a broad range of ICT systems used to provide and 
support learning and teaching. It usually combines several functions, such as organising, mapping 
and implementing curriculum activities, as well as providing a facility for teachers and students to 
have a dialogue about these activities, all by means of ICT. The term is sometimes applied to a virtual 
learning environment (VLE)41 or to the components of a managed learning environment (MLE).42 

Learning platforms give every student access to personal on-line web space, where they can do such 
things as store work and record their achievements. They also give every teacher access to teaching 
resources and tools to support lesson planning and teaching and learning. They also facilitate 
“personalised learning” by enabling teachers to tailor the curriculum to the needs of individual 
students. The experience of a learning platform can vary from school to school. However, where 

41 A VLE is a software tool that brings together resources for curriculum mapping, implementation, assessment, tutor support, 
communication, and tracking. 

42 A managed learning environment (MLE) comprises the whole range of information systems and processes that facilitate learning and 
the management of learning within an institution. It includes VLEs or other learning platforms and administrative and other support 
systems. 

59 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
there is a strong determination to embed the platform in the working practices of a school, the 
benefits for teachers, students and parents can be impressive. An effective learning platform can 
also support school management and administration. 

Benefits of learning platforms for teachers 
An effective learning platform can enable teachers to 
• create and share teaching materials that can be accessed on line, printed out, or used with an 
interactive whiteboard or data projector 
• put their resources on line page by page, lesson plan by lesson plan, so that colleagues can 
access them both in school and from home, thus facilitating collaboration within their subject 
area 
• obtain access to a wide variety of learning materials that they can customise for the exact needs 
of their students 
• obtain access to lesson plans from colleagues to facilitate cover for teacher substitution 
• assess, monitor and track individual and group progress 
• receive submissions of work from students in one area that is easy to manage 
• manage, within personal desktop space, their timetables, diary, e-mail, and discussions 
• increase their ICT competence and confidence. 
Benefits of learning platforms for students 
An effective learning platform can enable students to 
• obtain access to learning materials created by their teachers and others, outside lesson time and 
from locations such as their local library or home 
• store their work and notes on line for use in assignments, homework and revision, outside 
normal school hours 
• work at their own pace and with a wider choice of learning styles, through a more personalised 
curriculum 
• create an on-line portfolio, including digital photographs and videos of performance, as well as 
text 
• improve their ICT skills and on-line management of materials 
• submit homework and assignments for marking and assessment 
• communicate by e-mail and participate in live discussions and forums with other students and 
with teachers. 
Benefits of learning platforms for parents 
An effective learning platform can enable parents to 
• play a greater part in their child’s learning, where they have access to the learning platform from 
home 
• support children in learning that takes place outside school 
• obtain access to their child’s personal home page to keep track of their work and the curriculum 
60 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
• view reports, attendance data, and scores in assessment activities 
• communicate effectively with teachers, school administrators and others supporting their child’s 
learning 
• engage with wider school issues through on-line communication tools 
• become active partners with the school. 
Benefits of learning platforms for administration and management 
An effective learning platform can 
• provide up-to-date management information on attendance and attainment 
• track the progress of individuals and groups of students 
• collate summative and formative assessments 
• reduce the administrative burden on teachers by using transferable data 
• enable communication within school and beyond, one to one, one to many, or many to many 
• increase communication with parents. 
When they are implemented effectively it is clear that learning platforms can have many benefits for 
schools, including “any time, anywhere” learning, greater parental involvement, the development 
of personalised learning, better use of teachers’ time, enhanced effectiveness of substitution 
teachers, collaboration, cross-institutional working, and increased inclusion of students in both their 
school and personal work. The school of the future will in all likelihood be operating its own 
learning platform; indeed some schools are already operating such systems, while others are 
experimenting with the technology. It is recommended that schools that have effectively 
implemented their own learning platforms be identified as models of good practice for other 
schools. The NCTE could play a role in identifying such schools and in disseminating their practices 
and experiences among other schools. 

3.10.2 The school web site 
Schools with their own web site regard it as a means of informing the public about their school and 
as a way of promoting the work done in their school. Some websites contain information on 
initiatives and projects that the school is involved in, as well as examples of students’ work. 

The national surveys of teachers asked respondents to state whether their school had a web site 
and, if so, whether there were examples of students’ work displayed on it. Fig. 3.9 and fig. 3.10 
give details of the responses received from primary and post-primary teachers, respectively. 

61 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
Fig. 3.9: The primary school web site: teachers’ responses 

If yes, is there pupil project work on

Does your school have a school website? 

the website? 

No 61% Yes 39% 
Base: All primary teachers (n = 1162) 


No 68% Yes 32% 
Base: All primary teachers from schools 
with a website (n = 425) 


Approximately 39% of primary teachers stated that their school had a web site, and of these 
approximately a third (32%) stated that their site contained reference to, or details of, work done by 
students. A higher proportion of teachers of senior classes stated that their web site contained 
reference to work done by their students (41% of teachers of senior classes, compared with 29% of 
teachers of junior classes). 

The survey of fifth-class students found that 41% did not know whether their school had a web site 
(even though approximately a quarter of these students were in schools that did have one). Of those 
who were aware (37%), only 20% said that their work had appeared on the site. A much higher 
proportion of girls (32%) stated that their work had appeared on their school web site than boys 
(11%). 

Fig. 3.10: The post-primary school web site: teachers’ responses 

Does your school have a school website? If yes, is there student project work on the website? 

No 18% 
Don’t 
know 
9% 
Yes 73% 
Base: All post-primary teachers (n = 800) 


No 52% 
Yes 20% Don’t 
know 28% 
Base: All post-primary teachers from schools 
with a website (n = 567) 


62 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
Nearly three-quarters (73%) of all post-primary teachers stated that their school had a web site. Of 
those who did, however, only 20% reported that their site contained a reference to, or details of, 
project work or other work done by students. A similar pattern of findings emerged from the survey 
of fifth-year students. Approximately 30% of students did not know whether their school had a 
web site (approximately half of these students were in schools that did have a web site). Of those 
who were aware that their school had a web site, only 36% had had the opportunity to contribute 
to it. 

While an awareness of security issues associated with the internet must be borne in mind, these 
findings are disappointing. Firstly, a considerable proportion of schools do not have their own web 
site. Secondly, a sizable portion of those schools that do have a web site do not seem to actively 
promote it. Finally, some schools are opting, either consciously or unconsciously, not to present 
students’ work or other work done in their school. This is surprising in an age when many people 
automatically resort to the internet when looking for information on schools. 

While numerous evaluation reports on case-study schools referred to the desirability of a school 
either establishing its own web site or developing the use of its existing site, it was also clear that, of 
those schools that already had one, many experienced difficulties in both developing and 
maintaining the site. Difficulties encountered at both primary and post-primary level included a lack 
of technical expertise among staff members. At post-primary level it was usually the ICT co


63 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
ordinator who was responsible for maintaining the site, and for those co-ordinators who were not 
ICT experts this task proved difficult and sometimes even frustrating. Even those co-ordinators who 
were comfortable with web site development reported difficulties in finding the time to devote to 
such work. In a few schools it was found that some senior students were responsible for setting up 
and maintaining the site. In those schools it was reported that this encouraged students in general 
to contribute to the site. Security issues with the internet also proved a problem, particularly at 
primary level. 

Despite the provision by the NCTE of dedicated support for schools for web site development, it 
would appear that most schools remain in need of advice, guidance or assistance regarding the 
setting up and maintenance of a web site. The NCTE should explore options for providing additional 
support to schools in relation to web site development. 

3.11Summary of findings and recommendations 

3.11.1 Main findings 
Funding issues 

• The student-computer ratio (SCR) for the majority of the thirty-two case study primary schools 
visited ranged from between 8:1 and 12:1. At post primary level, the SCR for the majority of the 
twenty schools visited ranged from between 5.2:1 and 8.4:1. These ratios were broadly in line 
with the findings of the NCTE census (2005) of ICT in schools which found a SCR in primary 
schools of 9.1:1 and 7:1 in post-primary schools. 

• DES grants make possible a significant improvement in schools’ ICT facilities, but they are 
frequently augmented by funding from other sources. Parents’ councils and other parents’ 
groups usually play a significant role here. The spending of private funds on computers, however, 
may contribute to an exacerbation of the digital divide, as some schools may be able to raise 
more private funds than others. 

• The lack of technical support and maintenance was found to be a major impediment to the 
development of ICT by schools. Furthermore, a number of schools have equipment that is 
obsolete and should be disposed of. 

ICT advisory service 

• The impact of the present ICT advisory service is limited. While it is acknowledged that levels of 
awareness of the service among teachers varied, awareness is generally low among both primary 
(48%) and post-primary (37%) teachers. Awareness was much higher, however, among ICT coordinators. 


64 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
• The use of the ICT advisory service was also found to be low. Of the 48% of teachers who 
reported awareness of the service at primary level only 46% (or 22% of all respondents) reported 
availing of it. At post-primary level this figure fell to 15% of all respondents. 

• There was high satisfaction with the information on, and availability of, ICT courses among those 
teachers who availed of the ICT advisory service. There were also high levels of satisfaction with 
the quality of the technical advice and the advice provided on classroom use of ICT. 

• A somewhat lower satisfaction rating, however, was associated with the quality of the school 
visits by the ICT advisor. At both primary and post-primary level, 42% of teachers who had 
received a school visit felt that the service received was either “fair” or “poor.” 

ICT access 

• All schools were found to provide both teachers and students with relatively high levels of access 
to computer facilities. 
• At primary level, the teachers of senior classes were more likely than teachers of junior 
classes to be provided with computer facilities for use at home. Furthermore, the location of 
computers in classrooms, as distinct from computer rooms, provided greater ICT access 
opportunities for students. 
• At post-primary level a little over a third of the teachers surveyed reported having access to 
computers in their own classroom. Teachers of subjects that require specialist rooms were 
more likely to have ICT facilities in their classroom. There is a greater permeation of 
computers in specialist rooms than in general classrooms at post-primary level. 

• Case-study primary schools were generally found to have restricted internet access. Most schools 
had access by means of a dial-up connection only; in some schools access was limited to one 
computer, while others had no access at all. Networking is developing in primary schools, 
although at a relatively slow pace. 

• Special-education teachers, particularly at primary level, were found to have good access to ICT 
facilities in their support settings. 

Computer rooms 

• Computer rooms are generally a feature of larger primary schools but are liable be used for a 
range of purposes. Most schools do not have space for such rooms. Both the national survey of 
principals and case-study evaluations found, however, that access to computers was more 
frequent and more relaxed in situations where computers were located in classrooms. 

• The average number of computers found in the computer rooms of case-study post-primary 
schools was twenty-four. Most computer rooms were networked and had broadband access or 

65 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
were working on acquiring such access. The timetabled occupancy of these rooms per week 

ranged from 30% to 90%, with the average being a little over 60%. 

Software and web sites 

• While computer applications are used often as a teaching aid, particularly in the area of special 
educational needs, not all staff members in schools are clear about the nature and range of 
software that is already available to them in their school. Most of the software in primary schools 
is content-rich and is predominantly used to promote literacy and numeracy. 

• A sizable proportion of schools do not have their own web site. Of those that do, many do not 
actively promote it or use it to maximum effect. Schools do, however, experience difficulties in 
developing and maintaining a web site. 

3.11.2 Recommendations 
Recommendations for policy-makers and policy advisors 

• Consideration needs to be given to improving the level of ICT resources available to schools. 
Ireland should be working towards enabling schools to equip all classrooms with an appropriate 
level of ICT infrastructure. Consideration should be given to equipping all classrooms with a 
computer for use by the teacher, broadband internet access with adequate bandwidth, and a 
fixed data projector and screen for use by the teacher in presentations. Furthermore, to ensure 
appropriate access to ICT by students, Ireland should strive to reduce its student-computer ratio 
(SCR) from the present 9.1:1 in primary schools and 7:1 in post-primary schools. International 
evidence suggests that countries that have taken a lead in this area are aiming for or achieving a 
ratio of 5:1 or less in all schools. Funding for ICT in schools should seek to provide schools with 
the capacity not only to acquire ICT facilities but also to upgrade their ICT systems and to 
manage obsolescence of computers and other equipment on a planned basis. 

• ICT maintenance in schools needs to be addressed in a co-ordinated fashion at system level so 
that all schools can benefit from having a secure and reliable infrastructure that will facilitate the 
integration of ICT throughout the school. This could entail the introduction of a quality ICT 
maintenance initiative for schools. (See section 7.3.1 for further comment on this 
recommendation.) The role of the ICT advisory service should be reviewed within the context of 
such an initiative. 

• Schools that have effectively implemented their own learning platforms should be identified as 
models of good practice for other schools. The NCTE could play a role in identifying such schools 
and in disseminating information about their practices among other schools. 

66 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
• The NCTE, in collaboration with the SESS, should develop existing guidelines (and create new 
guidelines where appropriate) for schools regarding the range and type of assistive technology 
devices and software available for use with students with special educational needs. 

• Most schools require advice, guidance and assistance regarding the development and 
maintenance of a school web site. The NCTE should explore how schools might be further 
supported in this regard. 

• There is a lack of appropriate software in schools to promote Irish, as well as software using Irish 
instructions. Software companies should be encouraged to fill this void. 

• Primary schools require guidance regarding the purchase of computer hardware and software, 
particularly in relation to the purchase of ICT peripherals. The NCTE is well placed to provide this 
advice. 

Recommendations for schools 

Support services 

• Schools should make use of relevant specialist support services as fully as possible. School 
principals and ICT co-ordinators should encourage classroom and subject teachers to liaise with 
such services where applicable. 

Funding 

• Schools should endeavour to allocate a separate annual budget for the maintenance and 
development of their ICT systems. Furthermore, schools should use ICT grants promptly when 
they are received. 

• The usefulness of older computers and equipment should be reviewed regularly. If it is decided 
that computers are obsolete they should be disposed of properly. 

ICT equipment and resources 

• As resources permit, schools should work towards providing all teaching and learning spaces with 
ICT facilities. At primary level the emphasis should be on locating computers in classrooms, as this 
seems to provide greater access opportunities for students. At post-primary level, schools should 
ensure, as far as possible, an equitable distribution of facilities between specialist and general 
classrooms. As an interim arrangement schools could give consideration to setting up a mobile 
ICT facility that could be shared between classrooms. 

• As appropriate opportunities arise, schools should develop the range of ICT peripherals and 
software available to facilitate teaching and learning. Consideration should be given to acquiring 
data projectors, digital cameras and interactive whiteboards. 

67 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
• Schools should develop inventories of the ICT hardware and software facilities available to their 
staff. These inventories should be updated and circulated to staff members regularly so as that 
teachers are fully informed at all times of the range of ICT facilities available to them. 

• Schools should carry out a regular ICT needs analysis in the area of special educational needs. 
This would help ensure the best match possible between specialised technology and applications 
and the needs of students with special educational needs. 

ICT access 

• Schools should ensure that staff members and students have adequate access to the internet. 

• Schools with a computer room (or rooms) should ensure maximum access to the room for their 
students. To facilitate this, in addition to appropriate timetabling, a simple and accessible system 
for booking the room should be adopted for teachers. It is also important that rules for the 
computer room are established and that these are regularly brought to the attention of all users 
of the room. 

• The provision of a dedicated e-mail service to schools and their teaching staff should be given 
priority within the introduction of the schools broadband network. Efforts should also be directed 
at encouraging teachers to use e-mail as part of their classroom practice. 

The on-line environment 

• Schools should strive to develop their own on-line learning platform. In addition, schools should 
develop their own web sites so as to facilitate better awareness of school activities, 
developments, and policies in the school and the wider community. 

Administration 

• Schools should fully exploit the benefits offered by ICT in school administration, especially in the 
areas of students’ records and timetabling. 

68 


