Evaluation methods Chapter 2 
Almost a decade ago Barton (1998) remarked, in relation to Britain, that “despite the massive 
investment of time and money in information technology it is difficult to get clear evidence of 
‘value-added’ in relation to IT use in our schools.” More recently, despite continued high levels of 
investment, Tearle (2004) noted that, “even today, the regular use of ICT by the majority of staff 
[members] and students within any one school is not commonplace”. In Britain the Office for 
Standards in Education, while noting that the importance of ICT as a tool for learning is now widely 
recognised, pointed out that “the government’s aim for ICT to become embedded in the work of 
schools is a reality in only a small minority of schools” (Ofsted, 2004). 

One type of ICT evaluation that is widely undertaken is the evaluation of the infrastructural 
development in schools. The NCTE censuses (which are referred to in chapters 1 and 3) are an 
example of this type of evaluation. This is an essential type of evaluation, and such statistics as the 
student-computer ratio are a useful indicator of the permeation of ICT in schools. However, it is a 
mistake to equate the availability of hardware with its productive use. To do so is an example of 
what Papert (1990) refers to as “technocentric” thinking and raises the question, “What 
contribution do these computers make to achieving the stated goals of education?” 

A different approach was that adopted by the authors of the Impact2 report, who investigated the 
correlation between the use of computers and attainment in National Tests and General Certificate 
of Secondary Education (GCSE) results in Britain (Harrison et al., 2003). That research set out to 
determine whether or not those students who used and were familiar with computers attained 
better results in national tests than their counterparts who did not. 

The most common qualitative approach to assessing the impact of ICT is by observation of teaching 
and learning in classrooms. This is the approach normally adopted by school inspectorates. The 
report by the Office for Standards in Education referred to earlier was based mainly on visits to 
schools by inspectors between April 2002 and December 2003. A similar approach was adopted in 
the development of school portraits as part of the European Research Network for ICT in Schools of 
Tomorrow (ERNIST) project, the purpose of which was to identify and disseminate examples of 
innovative uses of ICT in the classroom. Van Oel (2004) reported that, in addition to observing 
classroom practice, inspectors examined school planning documents and discussed the issues and 
their findings with the wider school community. 

Haydn (2001) has pointed out that the types of ICT that may add value to a lesson vary from subject 
to subject. Similarly, some evaluation techniques may have specific applicability. For example, Barton 
(1997) carried out a study in which he compared the time students spent drawing graphs manually 
with the time taken using data-logging equipment. This type of comparative study seems attractive, 
as it appears to have the potential to demonstrate “added value” through the use of ICT. 

The present evaluation may be described as a combination of the quantitative and the qualitative. 

19 



ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
The combination of the two approaches was designed to provide a more comprehensive overview 
of the impact of ICT in schools. 

2.3 Overview and aims of the evaluation 
There has been little published research evidence on the efficacy of ICT initiatives in schools in 
Ireland, particularly with regard to teaching and its impact on students’ learning. This report aims to 
bridge that gap. The aim of this evaluation was to assess the impact that ICT is having on education 
in primary and post-primary schools. The evaluation also sought to assess the knowledge, skills, 
attitudes and beliefs of teachers and students in relation to the use of ICT in the teaching and 
learning process and in schools in general. The objectives of the evaluation may be summarised as 
follows: 
• to assess the extent of the use of ICT in primary and post-primary schools 
• to evaluate the impact of ICT on teaching and learning 
• to assess the ICT skills of students at selected points in the education system 
• to obtain the views of principals and teachers about their ICT skills and their opinions about the 

impact and future role of ICT in education 
• to assess the extent to which ICT is used to support students with special educational needs 
• to make recommendations that will inform the development of Department of Education and 

Science policy. 

The evaluation examined the availability of ICT in schools, the extent to which ICT was being used 
by teachers to enhance and expand their teaching methods, and the extent to which students used 
ICT to help them to learn, to obtain access to information, or for communication purposes. Evidence 
was collected from a number of sources: 
• a national survey of primary (234) and post-primary (110) principals that elicited their views on 

the level and use of ICT in schools 

• a national survey of primary (1,162) and post-primary (800) teachers designed to examine their 
beliefs about the effectiveness of computers and other forms of ICT in contributing to education. 
The teachers were also asked about their own skill levels in using computers and the degree to 
which computers were used to support implementation of the curriculum 

• visits by inspectors to a sample of case-study primary and post-primary schools to evaluate ICT 
provision (32 primary schools and 20 post-primary schools) 

• a questionnaire for students, administered by the inspectors during their evaluation visits to the 
case-study schools. The questionnaires asked students about the frequency with which they used 
computers at home and at school, the extent to which they believed they could perform basic 
operations with computers, and their expectations about whether their future studies or career 
would involve significant use of ICT 

• the use by inspectors of ICT review schedules during classroom inspections as part of whole


20 



Evaluation methods Chapter 2 
school evaluation (WSE) at primary level (77 schools) and during subject inspections at post-

primary level (111 schools).15 

This report presents analyses of quantitative and qualitative data collected from principals, teachers, 
students and inspectors at primary and post-primary level. Taken together, this wide range of data 
sources provided a much richer data set than would have been possible from any one source alone. 
It also allowed for cross-referencing and the triangulation of evidence. 

2.4 National survey of primary and post-primary 
principals and teachers 
During the period October–December 2005 a national postal survey of school principals and 
teachers was conducted. 

2.4.1 Survey sampling methods 
A total eligible population of 3,024 primary schools16 and 711 post-primary schools17 were identified 
for participation in the surveys of principals and teachers. On the assumption of a minimum 
response rate of 40% from each sector a systematic sample of 260 schools was taken from the 
primary school population with a view to obtaining a statistically valid sample of at least 100 
schools, while a sample of 155 schools was taken from the post-primary school population with a 
view to obtaining a statistically valid sample of at least 50 schools. Both school samples were 
selected using the following stratifying variables: 

(1) region (North and Dublin North, South-East and Dublin South, West and Mid-West, South, 
Midlands, and Dublin West)18 
(2) school size (small, medium, large) 
(3) school type (mixed, all boys, all girls) 
(4) student-computer ratio (low, medium, high, not known)19 
(5) disadvantaged status. 
15 See www.education.ie for information and related publications on whole-school evaluations in primary and post-primary schools and 
on subject inspections in post-primary schools. 

16 There were 3,284 recognised primary schools in Ireland in the 2005/06 school year, but special schools and those schools participating 
in whole-school evaluations at the time of the postal survey were excluded. 

17 There were 735 recognised post-primary schools in Ireland in the 2005/06 school year, but those participating in whole-school 
evaluations at the time of the postal survey were excluded. 

18 North and Dublin North Region (Cos. Cavan, Donegal, Dublin (Fingal), Dublin (North), Leitrim, Louth, Meath, Monaghan, Sligo); 
South-East and Dublin South Region (Cos. Carlow, Dublin South, Dún Laoghaire and Rathdown, Kildare (North), Kilkenny, Wexford, 
Wicklow); West and Mid-West Region (Cos. Clare, Galway, Limerick, Mayo, Roscommon, Tipperary (North); South Region (Cos. Cork, 
Kerry, Tipperary (South), Waterford); Midlands and Dublin West Region (Cos. Dublin (West and South-West), Kildare (South), Laois, 
Longford, Offaly, Westmeath). 

19 The student-computer ratio (SCR) for a school is the total number of students enrolled divided by the number of computers in the 
school. The median SCR for all primary schools sampled was approximately 9.7 students per computer. Accordingly, a school with 
fewer than 9.7 students per computer was classified as having a low SCR (more favourable), while a school with more than 9.7 
students per computer was classified as having a high SCR. The SCR was obtained from the NCTE census (2005), and a SCR was 
available for 92 % of all schools sampled. In the case of post-primary schools the median SCR for those sampled was approximately 

7.4. Accordingly, a school with fewer than 7.4 students per computer was classified as having a low SCR (more favourable), while a 
school with more than 7.4 students per computer was classified as having a high SCR. Again, the SCR was obtained from the NCTE 
census (2005), and a SCR was available for 80 % of all schools sampled. 
21 



ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
The populations of primary and post-primary schools were sorted by these variables. For primary 
schools a systematic random sample of 260 schools was selected by starting at a random point and 
selecting every nth school. The starting point was selected by choosing a number at random from 1 
to 3,024. The n was determined by dividing the total number of schools by the total sample size, i.e. 
3,024 divided by 260. (To increase the likelihood of obtaining a minimum response rate of 40%, an 
oversample was taken to account for the fact that some schools may not have been able to 
participate.) The list was subsequently treated as circular, i.e. school 1 followed school 3,024. This 
was approximately equivalent to selecting a proportionate stratified sample in accordance with the 
variables described above. The same selection principle was applied to the population of post-
primary schools. 

2.4.2 Survey research methods 
In each of the 260 primary and 155 post-primary schools surveyed the principal received a letter of 
notification from the Inspectorate stating that their school had been chosen for participation in the 
postal survey. This letter provided schools with the background to the survey and also stated that 
survey questionnaires would follow. 

Subsequently, each school received one questionnaire for the principal and a number of 
questionnaires for the teachers. All teachers in primary schools that had eight or fewer teachers 
were asked to complete a questionnaire; primary schools with more than eight teachers were asked 
to ensure that one teacher per class group completed a questionnaire.20 For post-primary schools, all 
teachers in schools with nine or fewer teachers were asked to complete a questionnaire; those 
schools with more than nine teachers were asked to ensure that one teacher from each subject 
group completed a questionnaire.21 

These questionnaires for principals and teachers were developed by a team of inspectors, in 
collaboration with the NCTE, following a review of relevant literature and an analysis of the content 
of previous questionnaires. With the assistance of a small number of practising principals and 
teachers, all questionnaires were piloted before being tested among a larger sample of principals 
and teachers. This piloting helped to refine the questionnaires and ensured that all questions asked 
were specific and accurate. 

Two weeks after the questionnaires were sent to schools a second mailing was issued to those 
schools that, at that point, had not returned their questionnaires. This was followed by a series of 
telephone calls to schools where the response rate among the chosen variables was lower than 
average. 

20 Class groups: junior infants, senior infants, first class, second class, third class, fourth class, fifth class, and sixth class. 

21 Nine subject groups: (1) English; (2) Mathematics; (3) Irish; (4) Foreign Languages; (5) Science (Physics, Chemistry, Physics and 

Chemistry, Biology, Applied Mathematics, Science); (6) Business Studies (Accountancy, Business, Business Studies, Economics); (7) 

Applied Science (Engineering and Metalwork, Technical Drawing and Graphics, Construction Studies and Materials Technology 

(Wood), Agricultural Science, Agricultural Economics, Home Economics); (8) Social Studies I (History, Geography, Art, Craft and 

Design, Music); (9) Social Studies II (Religious Education, Physical Education, Civic, Social and Political Education (CSPE), Social, 

Personal and Health Education (SPHE)). 

22 



Evaluation methods Chapter 2 Evaluation methods Chapter 2 
2.4.3 Response rate 
Responses were received from 240 (92%) of the 260 primary schools surveyed. Completed 
questionnaires were received from 234 principals and 1,162 class teachers (an average of almost 
five teachers per school). At post-primary level, responses were received from 114 (74%) of the 155 
schools surveyed. Completed questionnaires were received from a total of 110 principals and 800 
teachers (an average of 7 teachers per school). Based on previous experience of similar surveys, the 
actual response rate in all schools was more than double what was projected. This high response 
rate reflected the degree of interest in the survey, the perceived importance of the topic, and the 
follow-up procedure adopted to ensure that replies were received. 

Fig. 2.1: Survey response rates 

Impact of ICT on teaching and learning – response rates 


100% 

80% 

60% 

40% 

20% 

0% 

92% 
74% 
Primary (n=260) Post-primary (n=155) 


23 



ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
2.4.4 Comparison of respondents and population 
The profile of the final sample of primary and post-primary schools was compared with that of the 
population. This comparison is described in tables 2.1 and 2.2. 

Table 2.1: Comparison of survey sample and population, primary schools 

Primary Schools 
Size (students) Respondents22 Population 
(n = 240) (n = 3,024) 
Small (<100) 

52% 

53% 

Medium (100–199) 

24% 

23% 

Large (200+) 

24% 

24% 

Total 

100% 

100% 

Type 

Respondents 

Population 

Single-sex 

17% 

17% 

Mixed 

83% 

83% 

Total 

100% 

100% 

Status 

Respondents 

Population 

Schools in the School Support Programme (under DEIS)23 

22% 

20% 

Schools not in the School Support Programme 

78% 

80% 

Total 

100% 

100% 

Region 

Respondents 

Population 

North and Dublin North 

23% 

24% 

South-East and Dublin South 

15% 

16% 

West and Mid-West 

27% 

26% 

South 

19% 

19% 

Midlands and Dublin West 

15% 

15% 

Total 

100% 

100% 

22 A respondent is defined as a school in respect of which a response was received either from the principal or from at least one teacher. 

23 DEIS (Delivering Equality of Opportunity in Schools), the action plan for educational disadvantage, was launched in 2005 and is being 
introduced in a phased manner over the period 2005–2010. It addresses the educational needs of children and young people from 
disadvantaged communities, from pre-school to second-level education (age 3–18). The plan provides for a standardised system for 
identifying levels of disadvantage and a new integrated School Support Programme (SSP). The SSP will bring together, and build 
upon, a number of existing interventions in schools with a concentrated level of disadvantage. More information on DEIS can be 
found at www.education.ie. 

24 



Evaluation methods Chapter 2 
Table 2.2: Comparison of survey sample and population, post-primary schools 

Post-primary schools 
Size (students) Respondents Population 
(n = 114) (n = 711) 
Small (<400) 

42% 

45% 

Medium (400–599) 

31% 

28% 

Large (>600) 

28% 

27% 

Total 

100% 

100% 

Type 

Respondents 

Population 

Single-sex 

36% 

35% 

Mixed 

64% 

65% 

Total 

100% 

100% 

Status 

Respondents 

Population 

Schools in the School Support Programme (under DEIS) 

26% 

28% 

Schools not in the School Support Programme 

74% 

72% 

Total 

100% 

100% 

Region 

Respondents 

Population 

North and Dublin North 

19% 

19% 

South-East and Dublin South 

20% 

21% 

West and Mid-West 

21% 

20% 

South 

20% 

20% 

Midlands and Dublin West 

20% 

20% 

Total 

100% 

100% 

The profile of respondents closely matched that of the population for both primary and post-primary 
schools according to the key variables of school size, type, status, and region. 

2.5 Case-study school evaluations 
A case study comprising an evaluation by inspectors of ICT provision in a sample of 32 primary 
schools and 20 post-primary schools formed part of the evaluation methods employed. These 52 
schools were selected as a subset of the main sample chosen for participation in the survey of 
primary and post-primary principals and teachers. (See section 2.4.) Because the case-study schools 
were a subset of the main survey sample and were selected randomly (as was the main sample), the 
case-study schools also reflected the known population profile according to the main stratifying 
variables. However, it should be borne in mind that the sample size was too small to be considered 
representative. 

25 



ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
Each of the fifty-two case-study schools was visited by an inspector between October 2005 and 
February 2006. The schools were notified by telephone and letter of their participation in the 
evaluation two to three weeks before the inspector’s visit. The inspectors usually spent one day in 
each school and undertook the following activities: 
• a tour of the school’s ICT facilities in the company of either the principal or the ICT co-ordinator 
• separate interviews with the principal, the ICT co-ordinator and a small group of teachers, 

normally four (the principal in each school was asked to select the group to be representative of 
the range of ICT use in the classroom and to include a teacher involved with special educational 
needs) 

• interviews with a small group of students, usually four (in primary schools the students were from 
fifth class, while in post-primary schools they were Leaving Certificate year 1 students) 
• examination of samples of students’ work in, or using, ICT; the students usually took such work 
with them to their interview with the inspector 
• a review of relevant school documents; specifically, schools were asked to supply the inspectors 
with 

— a copy of the school’s ICT plan and acceptable-use policy 
— an inventory of all ICT equipment, including ICT peripherals, in the school, indicating its 
location in the different classrooms or areas in the school 
— a copy of the duties of the ICT co-ordinator 
— a copy of the timetable for any computer room (or rooms) in the school 
• feedback to the principal. 
The inspectors used a number of instruments as part of the case-study school evaluations to gather 
evidence and data on a school’s provision of ICT. These included a “quick tour” review schedule that 
helped to gather certain factual information on the school’s ICT infrastructure. Other instruments 
used included schedules for the interviews held with the principal, the ICT co-ordinator, and the 
small groups of teachers and students. 

The inspectors also reviewed relevant background documents as part of the case-study school visits. 
Questionnaires for the principal and teachers were received from all fifty-two case-study schools, 
and these were reviewed as part of the study. Information held by the Department of Education and 
Science was also consulted (for example information on ICT grants awarded in recent years), as was 
ICT infrastructure census information (2005) held by the NCTE. 

On completion of the school visits a brief report was prepared and issued to each school. These 
reports addressed the ICT facilities that were found in the schools, as well as ICT planning and ICT in 
the classroom. As well as emphasising the strengths evident from the evaluation, each report 
included recommendations for schools to address as part of their development plans for ICT in the 
school. 

26 



Evaluation methods Chapter 2 
During the visits to schools the inspectors also administered a questionnaire to students. The 
purpose of this questionnaire was to determine the views of students on ICT, not only with regard 
to their interaction with ICT in school but also with regard to their use of ICT outside school time. 
For primary schools an entire fifth class was selected for participation, while for post-primary schools 
an entire Leaving Certificate year 1 class was selected. It was decided to select fifth-class students in 
primary schools because it was thought that this group would have enough experience of ICT in the 
school to be able to give informative feedback; this age group was also considered to be mature 
enough to respond to such formal approaches as interviews and questionnaires. At the post-primary 
level, Leaving Certificate year 1 students were selected because at that point in their schooling they 
would have had three or four years’ experience of ICT in their school and so were considered to be 
in a position to give informed responses to questions. A total of 437 primary students and 450 post-
primary students completed questionnaires. Reference is made to the findings of this survey of 
students throughout this report. 

2.6 Observations during classroom inspections 
(primary) and subject inspections (post-
primary) 
During the period in which case-study schools were being visited by inspectors (October 2005 to 
February 2006), the majority of the inspectors who were engaged in evaluative work in mainstream 
primary and post-primary schools completed an “ICT review schedule” for each school they 
visited.24 These schools were not a subset of the schools that participated in the survey of primary 
and post-primary principals and teachers but were simply those selected for evaluation as part of the 
continuing work of the Inspectorate in the period in question. The ICT review schedules used by the 
inspectors were a means of gathering first-hand information on the use of ICT in those schools, 
particularly with regard to teaching and learning in the classroom. 

2.6.1 Primary schools 
The ICT review schedule used by inspectors at primary level contained three sections. The first two 
sections were identical and were to be completed in respect of two individual mainstream class 
teachers. The third section was to be completed in relation to the work of a member of the special-
education team in a school (for example the resource teacher, the learning-support teacher or the 
resource teacher for Travellers). The first part of each of the three sections in the schedule required 
inspectors to ask questions of the individual teacher relating to their ICT planning and their use of 
ICT. The second part of each section asked inspectors to observe and evaluate the level of 
integration of ICT in teaching and learning during the inspection period with that teacher. 

24 In the course of their work, inspectors undertake WSEs in both primary and post-primary schools. These evaluations are usually 
conducted by inspectors working in teams. In addition—and although subject inspections form part of the WSE process in a post-
primary school—inspectors also undertake separate subject inspections in post-primary schools. 

27 



ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
In all, inspectors visited 77 primary schools during the period in question and completed ICT review 
schedules in respect of 127 mainstream class teachers. As each schedule was completed during a 
specific lesson, the inspectors observed 127 lessons. Most of these lessons took place in classrooms 
with more than one class group (for example, one lesson in a small rural school might have had first, 
second and third-class students in the same classroom). The classes involved, however, ranged from 
infants to sixth class. Fig. 2.2 provides details of the lessons observed. 

Fig. 2.2: Mainstream lesson observations in primary schools 

Class level(s) being taught 

(Multiple response) 

40% 
30% 
20% 
10% 
0% 
20% 19% 
23% 
17% 
26% 
23% 
30% 31% 
Infants Senior First Second Third Fourth Fifth Sixth 
Infants Class Class Class Class Class Class 

Base: All mainstream class observations (n=127) 

Inspectors completed ICT review schedules in respect of 71 special-education team members 
(resource teacher, learning-support teacher or resource teacher for Travellers), and therefore 71 
lessons conducted by a member of a special-education team were observed. 

2.6.2 Post-primary schools 
The ICT review schedule used by inspectors at post-primary level was subject-focused and contained 
two sections. The first section comprised a short subject questionnaire that required the inspector to 
ask questions of the principal and the teacher (or teachers) of the particular subject (or subjects) 
being evaluated. These questions related to the use of ICT in the subject (or subjects), ICT in subject 
planning, and the preparation and implementation of ICT in the assessment of students’ 
achievement. The second section of the review schedule comprised two lesson observation forms 
and asked inspectors to record the level of integration of ICT in teaching and learning in the subject 
area being evaluated. Inspectors generally completed one of these forms for a junior-cycle lesson 
and one for a senior-cycle lesson. 

28 



Evaluation methods Chapter 2 
In total, 111 post-primary schools were visited by inspectors during the period in question. This 
comprised both those schools that participated in WSE and those that participated in a separate 
subject inspection. This process yielded a total of 168 completed ICT review schedules. In essence, 
this meant that 168 subject questionnaires were completed jointly by teachers and principals. The 
subjects reviewed are illustrated in fig. 2.3.25 

Fig. 2.3: Subjects reviewed at post-primary level 

20% 
15% 
10% 
5% 
0% 
17% 17% 
16% 
13% 
11% 
7% 
5% 
4% 
2% 
8% 
Science Social Applied Foreign English Maths Business Irish Social Other 
Studies I Science Languages Studies Studies II 

Base: All post-primary subject questionnaires (n=168) 

Arising from the 111 post-primary school visits inspectors completed ICT review schedules in respect 
of a total of 311 lessons. Table 2.3 gives details of the level of those lessons observed. 

Table 2.3: Number and level of lessons observed, post-primary schools 

Level Number of lessons observed Percentage 
Junior Certificate 

154 

49.5% 
Transition Year 

38 

12.2% 
Leaving Certificate 

119 

38.3% 

Total 

311 

100% 

25 In this regard only subjects in which inspections took place are included in the relevant subject groups, as follows: Science (29 subject 
questionnaires completed for Science, Physics, Chemistry, and Biology); Social Studies I (28 subject questionnaires completed for 
History, Geography, and Music); Applied Science (27 subject questionnaires completed for Engineering and Metalwork, Technical 
Drawing and Graphics, Construction Studies and Materials Technology (Wood), and Home Economics); Foreign Languages (22 
subject questionnaires completed for French, German, and Classical Studies); English (18 subject questionnaires completed for 
English); Mathematics (11 subject questionnaires completed for Mathematics); Business Studies (9 subject questionnaires completed 
for Accountancy, Business, and Business Studies); Irish (7 subject questionnaires completed for Irish); Social Studies II (4 subject 
questionnaires completed for Physical Education); other (13 subject questionnaires completed for Guidance (8), Transition Year 
modules (3), and computers (2)). 

29 



ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
2.7 On-line evaluation 
Twenty post-primary schools, as described in section 2.5, participated in the case studies. In these 
schools inspectors interviewed a total of 79 teachers. Each of these teachers was subsequently 
invited to take part in a follow-up on-line survey, which was designed to build a profile of the 
teachers involved and to obtain further insights into their views on a number of specific issues raised 
in the interviews. The teachers were asked to complete an on-line questionnaire based primarily on 
responses obtained in the interviews. A total of 37 teachers completed the questionnaire—a 
response rate of 47%. The profile of these teachers was compared with that of the random sample 
of 800 teachers who completed the postal questionnaire. The profiles of the two groups were 
found to match quite closely on a number of significant variables, namely gender, age, and 
computer ownership. 

2.8 Evaluation outputs and terms 
2.8.1 Outputs 
All data gathered as a result of the evaluation was analysed using relevant statistical analysis 
software. Each table and chart in this report presents results using percentages and counts. All 
percentages are based on valid counts (that is, where questions were answered by respondents, 
unless otherwise stated). Some rounding of percentages has occurred. The order of outputs in each 
section generally follows the order of questions in the relevant questionnaires. 

2.8.2 Junior and senior classes 
At primary level the use of the term “junior class” refers collectively to junior infants, senior infants, 
first class, and second class; “senior class” refers collectively to third class, fourth class, fifth class, 
and sixth class. At post-primary level the term “junior cycle” refers collectively to first year, second 
year, and third year; “senior cycle” refers to Transition Year, fifth year, and sixth year. 

2.8.3 Quantitative terms used in this report 
A number of quantitative terms are used throughout the report. Table 2.4 provides a guide to the 
most frequently used terms. 

Table 2.4: Quantitative terms used in the report 

Quantitative term Approximate percentage of occurrence 
Almost all 

More than 90% 

Most 

75–90% 

Majority 

50–74% 

Less than half 

25–49% 

A small number 

16–24% 

A few 

Up to 15% 

30 


