ICT in Schools 
Inspectorate Evaluation Studies 


INSPECTORATE 


PROMOTING THE QUALITY OF LEARNING 

ICT in Schools 
Inspectorate Evaluation Studies 


INSPECTORATE 


PROMOTING THE QUALITY OF LEARNING 

ICT in Schools 
The Inspectorate wishes to thank the following for the use of photographs: 
Clonakilty Community College, Clonakilty, Co Cork 
Saint Mark’s Community School, Tallaght, Dublin 24 
Saint Mac Dara’s Community College, Templeogue, Dublin 6W 
Scoil Barra Naofa, Monkstown, Cork 
Scoil Nano Nagle and Talbot Senior National School, Clondalkin, Dublin 22 
Whitechurch National School, Whitechurch Road, Dublin 16 

© 2008 Department of Education and Science 
ISBN-0-0000-0000-X 

Designed by Slick Fish Design, Dublin 
Printed by Brunswick Press, Dublin 

Published by 
Evaluation Support and Research Unit 
Inspectorate 
Department of Education and Science 
Marlborough Street 
Dublin 1 

To be purchased directly from 
Government Publications Sales Office 
Sun Alliance House 
Molesworth Street 
Dublin 2 

or by post from 
Government Publications 
Postal Trade Section 
Unit 20 
Lakeside Retail Park 
Claremorris 
Co Mayo 

€20 


Contents 

Foreword 

xi 
Executive summary 

xiii 

Part 1 Introduction 

Chapter 1 ICT in primary and post-primary education in Ireland 1 
1.1 Introduction 2 
1.2 Background 3 

1.3 ICT policy and investment in education 6 

1.3.1 Policy for ICT in education 6 

1.3.2 ICT in the curriculum 9 

1.3.3 Investment in ICT in education 11 

1.4 ICT infrastructure census in schools (2005) 12 

1.4.1 Computers in schools 12 

1.4.2 Other ICT equipment in schools 14 

1.4.3 Expenditure on ICT and technical support 15 

1.4.4 Other areas covered in the census 16 
1.5 Summary 16 

Chapter 2 Evaluation methods 17 
2.1 Introduction 18 

2.2 Approaches to evaluating ICT in schools 18 

2.3 Overview and aims of the evaluation 20 

2.4 National survey of primary and post-primary principals and teachers 21 

2.4.1 Survey sampling methods 21 

2.4.2 Survey research methods 22 

2.4.3 Response rate 23 

2.4.4 Comparison of respondents and population 24 

2.5 Case-study school evaluations 25 

2.6 Observations during classroom inspections (primary) and subject inspections (post-primary) 27 

2.6.1 Primary schools 27 

2.6.2 Post-primary schools 

28 

2.7 On-line evaluation 

30 

2.8 Evaluation outputs and terms 

30 

2.8.1 Outputs 

30 

2.8.2 Junior and senior classes 

30 

2.8.3 Quantitative terms used in this report 

30 

iii 



ICT in Schools 
Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 

Chapter 3 ICT infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools 

31 

3.1 Introduction 

32 

3.2 The ICT advisory service 

33 

3.3 ICT and funding 37 

3.4 ICT maintenance, technical support, and obsolescence 38 

3.5 Access to computers 41 

3.5.1 Access by teachers 41 

3.5.2 Access by students 42 

3.6 The use of computers in schools 45 

3.6.1 Organisation of ICT facilities in case-study primary schools 45 

3.6.2 Organisation of ICT facilities in case-study post-primary schools 49 

3.7 ICT peripherals 53 
3.8 Software 56 

3.9 Use of e-mail 57 

3.10 The on-line environment 59 

3.10.1 The learning platform 59 

3.10.2 The school web site 61 

3.11 Summary of findings and recommendations 64 

3.11.1 Main findings 64 
3.11.2 Recommendations 66 

Chapter 4 ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools 69 
4.1 Introduction 70 

4.2 The planning process 70 

4.2.1 The ICT steering committee 72 

4.2.2 The ICT co-ordinator 73 

4.2.3 The ICT plan 75 

4.2.4 The acceptable-use policy 79 

4.3 Implementation of ICT planning 80 

4.3.1 Teachers’ professional development 81 

4.3.2 Using ICT in classroom and lesson planning and preparation 

90 

4.3.3 Planning for using ICT in teaching and learning 

98 

4.4 Forward planning 

99 

4.4.1 Principals’ priorities for ICT development 

99 

4.4.2 Teachers’ priorities for ICT development 

101 

4.5 Findings and recommendations 

102 

4.5.1 Main findings 

102 

4.5.2 Recommendations 

105 

iv 



Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 

Chapter 5 ICT and teaching and learning in primary schools 

107 

5.1 Introduction 

108 

5.2 Teachers’ ICT qualifications and skills 

108 

5.3 Classroom practice and ICT 111 
5.3.1 Planning 111 

5.3.2 Frequency of ICT use 112 

5.3.3 Organisation of ICT use 113 

5.3.4 Focus of ICT use 114 

5.3.5 Use of resources and applications in the classroom 116 

5.3.6 Quality of provision 120 

5.3.7 Provision for students with special educational needs by mainstream class teachers 126 

5.4 ICT in special education 127 

5.4.1 Access to ICT 127 

5.4.2 Planning for the use of ICT 127 

5.4.3 Frequency of ICT use 128 

5.4.4 Focus of ICT use 129 

5.4.5 Use of resources and applications 130 

5.4.6 Quality of provision 131 
5.5 Assessment 133 

5.6 Developing ICT in the classroom 134 

5.6.1 Factors that constrain the development of ICT in the curriculum 134 

5.6.2 Factors that facilitate the development of ICT in the curriculum 134 

5.7 Findings and recommendations 135 

5.7.1 Main findings 135 
5.7.2 Recommendations 137 

Chapter 6 ICT and teaching and learning in post-primary schools 139 
6.1 Introduction 140 

6.2 ICT qualifications and skills 141 

6.2.1 Teachers’ ICT qualifications and skill levels 141 

6.2.2 Students’ ICT skill levels 

145 

6.3 Dedicated ICT lessons 

148 

6.3.1 Timetabling of dedicated ICT lessons 

149 

6.3.2 Curriculum and content of dedicated ICT lessons 

151 

6.4 Classroom practice and ICT 

152 

6.4.1 School principals’ support for the use of ICT in the classroom 

153 

6.4.2 ICT in practice in the classroom 

155 

6.4.3 Quality of provision 

163 

6.5 ICT and special educational needs 

167 

v 



ICT in Schools 
6.6 Assessment 

168 

6.7 Developing ICT in the classroom 

168 

6.7.1 Factors that constrain the development of ICT in the classroom 

168 

6.7.2 Factors that facilitate the development of ICT in the classroom 

170 

6.8 Findings and recommendations 172 

6.8.1 Main findings 172 
6.8.2 Recommendations 174 

Part 4 Summary of findings and recommendations 

Chapter 7 Main findings and recommendations 177 
7.1 Introduction 178 

7.2 Main findings 179 
7.2.1 Infrastructure 179 

7.2.2 ICT Planning 181 

7.2.3 ICT in teaching and learning 182 

7.3 Main recommendations for policy-makers and policy advisors 184 

7.3.1 ICT infrastructure 184 

7.3.2 Professional development needs of teachers 186 

7.4 Main recommendations for schools 188 

7.4.1 ICT infrastructure in schools 188 

7.4.2 Planning for ICT in schools 189 

7.4.3 ICT in teaching and learning 191 

References 194 

Appendix 197 

vi 



Abbreviations 

AP assistant principal 
AUP acceptable use policy 
BOM board of management 
CAD computer-aided design 
CEB Commercial Examining Board 
CESI Computer Studies Society of Ireland 
CPD continuing professional development 
DES Department of Education and Science 
ECDL European Computer Driving Licence 
EGFSN Expert Group on Future Skills Needs 
ERNIST European Research Network for ICT in Schools of Tomorrow 
ESI Education Services Interactive (Project) 
EU European Union 
FETAC Further Education and Training Awards Council 
ICD in-career development 
ICT information and communications technology 
ISC Information Society Commission 
LC Leaving Certificate (Established) 
LCA Leaving Certificate—Applied 
LCVP Leaving Certificate Vocational Programme 
LSRT learning-support resource teacher 
MLE managed learning environment 
NCC National Competitiveness Council 
NCCA National Council for Curriculum and Assessment 
NCTE National Centre for Technology in Education 
NPADC National Policy Advisory and Development Committee 
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
PCSP Primary Curriculum Support Programme 
PISA Programme for International Student Assessment 
SCR student-computer ratio 
SDP school development planning 
SDPI School Development Planning Initiative (Post-primary) 
SDPS School Development Planning Support (Primary) 
SDT special-duties teacher 
SESE Social, Environmental and Scientific Education 
SESS Special Education Support Service 
SIP Schools Integration Project 
TIF Telecommunications and Internet Federation 
VEC Vocational Education Committee 
VLE virtual learning environment 
WSE whole-school evaluation 

vii 



ICT in Schools 
Tables 

Table 1.1 Funding of ICT in education policy initiatives 

12 
Table 1.2 Student-computer ratio (SCR) in each school sector in given years 

13 
Table 1.3 Proportion of schools having at least one fixed and one mobile data projector 14 
Table 2.1 Comparison of survey sample and population, primary schools 24 
Table 2.2 Comparison of survey sample and population, post-primary schools 25 
Table 2.3 Number and level of lessons observed, post-primary schools 29 
Table 2.4 Quantitative terms used in the report 30 
Table 3.1 Awareness and use of NCTE and ICT advisory services among teachers 36 
Table 4.1 Teachers’ attendance at NCTE and ICT advisory service training courses 83 
Table 4.2 Professional development preferences of post-primary teachers, by subject 88 
Table 4.3 Teachers’ use of internet resources in planning and preparation for teaching 93 
Table 4.4 Primary principals’ views on the strategic development of ICT 100 
Table 4.5 Post-primary principals’ views on the strategic development of ICT 100 
Table 4.6 Teachers’ priority areas for the development of ICT 102 
Table 5.1 Proportion of primary teachers who rated their proficiency in ICT skills as either 
“intermediate” or “advanced” 109 
Table 5.2 Proportion of primary teachers who rated their ability in each of three ICT tasks 
that facilitate teaching and learning as either “intermediate” or “advanced” 111 
Table 5.3 Inspectors’ observations on the use of ICT to facilitate teaching and learning in 
classrooms 113 
Table 5.4 Teachers’ use of software and the internet to facilitate learning 117 
Table 5.5 Most frequently used applications in the teaching of individual curricular areas 117 
Table 5.6 Inspectors’ comments on the quality of use of ICT observed in teaching and learning 123 
Table 5.7 Applications used by members of special-education support teams to promote the 
development of skills 130 
Table 5.8 Most frequently used applications to promote the development of individual 
learning priority areas 131 
Table 5.9 Comparison of inspectors’ ratings of the quality of ICT provision in supporting 
children with special educational needs in mainstream and special-education 
support settings 

132 
Table 5.10 Sample of inspectors’ comments on the quality of ICT use in special-education 
support settings 

133 
Table 6.1 Proportion of post-primary teachers who rated their proficiency in ICT skills as 
either “intermediate” or “advanced” 

142 
Table 6.2 Proportions of post-primary teachers who rated their ability in each of three ICT 
tasks that facilitate teaching and learning as either “intermediate” or “advanced” 144 
Table 6.3 Timetabled dedicated ICT lessons in post-primary schools 

149 

viii 



Table 6.4 Commonly taught topics in dedicated ICT lessons 

151 
Table 6.5 Principals’ descriptions of how ICT is used in some subjects 

153 
Table 6.6 Principals’ views on the impact of ICT on teaching and learning 

154 
Table 6.7 Location of lessons observed during subject inspections 

155 
Table 6.8 ICT resources available in the classrooms of lessons observed 155 
Table 6.9 Use of the internet and software in teaching and learning 161 

Diagrams 

Fig. 2.1 Survey response rates 23 
Fig. 2.2 Mainstream lesson observations in primary schools 28 
Fig. 2.3 Subjects reviewed at post-primary level 29 
Fig. 3.1 Teachers’ ratings of NCTE and ICT advisory services 34 
Fig. 3.2 Access to computers by primary teachers 41 
Fig. 3.3 Access to computers by post-primary teachers 42 
Fig. 3.4 Access to computers by fifth-class students 43 
Fig. 3.5 Access to computers by fifth-year students 44 
Fig. 3.6 Frequency of use of ICT peripherals by primary teachers 54 
Fig. 3.7 Frequency of use of ICT peripherals by post-primary teachers 54 
Fig. 3.8 Provision and use of e-mail address by subject taught, post-primary schools 58 
Fig. 3.9 The primary school web site: teachers’ responses 62 
Fig. 3.10 The post-primary school web site: teachers’ responses 62 
Fig. 4.1 Contents of ICT plans, primary schools 77 
Fig. 4.2 Contents of ICT plans, post-primary schools 77 
Fig. 4.3 Staff ICT training in primary schools within the previous three years 81 
Fig. 4.4 Staff ICT training in post-primary schools within the previous three years 82 
Fig. 4.5 Principals’ and teachers’ views on ICT training requirements, primary schools 86 
Fig. 4.6 Principals’ and teachers’ views on ICT training requirements, post-primary schools 87 
Fig. 4.7 Use of computers for lesson preparation 90 
Fig. 4.8 Resources provided by mainstream primary teachers using ICT 91 
Fig. 4.9 Use of the internet in planning and preparation for teaching, by subject 

93 
Fig. 4.10 Scoilnet visits by teachers 

94 
Fig. 4.11 The most popular sections of Scoilnet among teachers 

95 
Fig. 4.12 Teachers’ ratings of Scoilnet 

96 
Fig. 4.13 Teachers’ views on what Scoilnet should contain 

97 
Fig. 5.1 Use and related proficiency of applications in teaching 

110 
Fig. 5.2 Extent to which mainstream teachers plan for the use of ICT 

112 
Fig. 5.3 Organisation of teaching and learning during use of ICT 

113 

ix 



ICT in Schools 
Fig. 5.4 Frequency of ICT use to promote learning in curricular areas 

114 
Fig. 5.5 Frequency of ICT use among mainstream and special class teachers to facilitate 
development of skills 

115 
Fig. 5.6 Frequency of use of individual internet resources by internet users 

119 
Fig. 5.7 Inspectors’ rating of the quality of use of ICT in teaching and learning 122 
Fig. 5.8 Students’ proficiency in individual tasks 125 
Fig. 5.9 Level of ICT support for students with special educational needs in mainstream 
classrooms 126 
Fig. 5.10 Level of access by students with special educational needs in special-education 
support settings 127 
Fig. 5.11 Extent to which special-education support team members plan for the use of ICT 128 
Fig. 5.12 Inspectors’ observations of the use of ICT to facilitate teaching and learning in 
special-education support settings 128 
Fig. 5.13 Frequency of ICT use in special-education support settings to facilitate 
development of skills 129 
Fig. 5.14 Inspectors’ ratings of the quality of use of ICT in teaching and learning observed in 
special-education support settings 132 
Fig. 6.1 Proficiency and use of applications in teaching 143 
Fig. 6.2 Students’ use of computers 146 
Fig. 6.3 Students’ ICT skill levels 147 
Fig. 6.4 Use of ICT in the planning and preparation of observed lessons 156 
Fig. 6.5 Main uses of ICT in teaching and learning in the subjects inspected, as 
reported by teachers 157 
Fig. 6.6 Frequency of use of computers in teaching 158 
Fig. 6.7 Settings in which ICT is used in classrooms 159 
Fig. 6.8 Use of the internet and applications, by subject area 162 
Fig. 6.9 Inspectors’ rating of the quality of use of ICT in teaching and learning observed 164 
Fig. 7.1 International student-computer ratios from PISA 2003 179 

x 



Foreword 

Information and communication technology has brought profound changes to almost all aspects of 
our lives in recent years. It has transformed activities as basic as how we work, communicate with 
each other, treat illnesses, travel, shop and enjoy our leisure time. The pace of change shows no sign 
of slowing: indeed, the development of ICT and its applications to areas such as the integration of 
media, are continuing at even faster rates than heretofore. In a relatively short period of time, ICT 
skills have become as fundamental to living a full life as being able to read, write and compute. 

Ireland has been a leading player in the development of the ICT industry. We have been a leading 
exporter of ICT hardware and software, and many of the key businesses in the industry have 
important bases here. Like other countries, we have also recognised that if our young people are to 
live full lives in a world transformed by ICT, they need to have opportunities to acquire and develop 
ICT skills from an early age. Since the late 1990s, we have made considerable investments in ICT 
infrastructure in schools, and in training for teachers and other professionals. Until now, little 
national research evidence has been published on the impact that the new technologies have had 
on schools and especially on teaching and learning. This report examines the extent to which ICT 
has been used in schools at both primary and post-primary levels and, more importantly, assesses 
the impact that ICT has had on teaching and learning, including the ways in which ICT is used to 
support the learning of students with special educational needs. 

The evaluation shows that while much progress has been achieved in the roll-out of ICT in schools, 
considerable challenges remain. The report presents findings and recommendations that will be of 
interest to teachers, principals, school support services, curriculum developers and policy-makers. I 
hope that it will inform debate and policy decisions on how we can ensure that young people have 
the skills, knowledge and attitudes necessary to benefit from the opportunities presented by this 
powerful technology in the years ahead. 

Eamon Stack 
Chief Inspector 


xi 



ICT in Schools 
xii 



Executive summary 
xiiiExecutive summary 
xiii

ICT in Schools ICT in Schools 
Executive summary 

An evaluation of the infrastructure, planning and use of information and communications 
technology in teaching and learning was conducted by the Inspectorate in primary and post-primary 
schools during the school year 2005/06. The objectives of the evaluation were: 

• to examine the extent to which ICT was used in primary and post-primary schools 
• to evaluate the impact of ICT on teaching and learning 
• to assess the ICT skills of students at selected points in the education system and to obtain their 

views on their experience of ICT in their schooling 
• to obtain the views of principals and teachers on their ICT skills and their opinions of the impact 
and future role of ICT in education 
• to make recommendations for policy development regarding ICT in schools. 

xiv 



Executive summary 
The evaluation methods comprised: 
• a national survey of primary (234) and post-primary (110) principals 

• a national survey of primary (1,162) and post-primary (800) teachers 

• case-study school evaluations by inspectors (32 primary schools, 20 post-primary schools) 

• observations during classroom inspections (77 primary schools) 

• observations during subject inspections (111 post-primary schools) 

• a follow-up on-line survey of teachers in case-study post-primary schools. 

Summary of main findings 

The findings and recommendations are summarised here and are elaborated in chapter 7. 

Infrastructure 

• The student-computer ratio (SCR) in Irish schools is 9.1:1 at primary level and 7:1 at post-primary 
level. Information available from the OECD suggests that countries that have taken the lead in 
the provision of ICT in schools are aiming for or achieving a SCR of 5:1. 

• In the main, schools make effective use of the grants provided by the DES for developing their 
ICT systems. However, schools generally spend considerably more on ICT than the sums made 
available through these grants schemes. 

• The lack of technical support and maintenance is a significant impediment to the development of 
ICT in schools. 

• At primary level, computer rooms are generally a feature of the larger schools. However, access 
by students to computers was found to be superior where the computers were located in the 
classrooms. At the post-primary level there is a greater permeation of computers in specialist 
rooms than in general classrooms. 

• Schools were found to use a limited range of ICT peripherals, mainly printers, scanners, and 
digital cameras. Digital projectors were found in post-primary schools. At primary level, interactive 
whiteboards were present in a small number of schools. 

• Schools that made dedicated computer facilities available to teachers reported that it led to the 
use of more high-quality and creative teaching resources in classrooms. 

xv 



ICT in Schools 
Planning 

• Responsibility for ICT in a school can lie with an ICT steering committee, the principal, the deputy 
principal, an ICT co-ordinator, or a combination of these personnel. Greater efficiency is achieved 
where a named person has responsibility for ICT within a school and where their role is clearly 
defined. 

• The majority (71%) of primary schools surveyed, but fewer than half (46%) of post-primary 
schools, were found to have a written ICT plan. These plans tend to concentrate more on 
infrastructural issues than on how ICT can be used to enhance teaching and learning. 

• Most schools (83% of primary schools, 87% of post-primary schools) were found to have an 
acceptable-use policy (AUP). This is a product of the requirements of the Schools Broadband 
Access Programme and the safety-awareness initiatives of the NCTE. It is also an indication of the 
seriousness that schools attach to the risks associated with the use of the internet. 

• The majority of teachers make some use of ICT in lesson planning and preparation. Newly 
qualified teachers are more likely to use ICT for this purpose than their more experienced 
colleagues. However, fewer teachers were found to plan for the use of ICT in teaching and 
learning. At the post-primary level, planning for the use of ICT in teaching varies between 
subjects. The programmes for Transition Year, LCVP and LCA specifically encourage planning for 
the use of ICT in teaching and learning. Teachers of these programmes regularly reported that 
their involvement also encouraged them to use ICT in their teaching with other class groups. 

• School principals and teachers identified the provision and maintenance of hardware in schools 
and the provision of professional development opportunities in ICT as being strategically 
important for the development of ICT in their school. Generic programmes of professional 
development, because of their wider appeal, were found to have a greater take-up among 
teachers than topic-specific programmes. 

Teaching and learning 

• Only 30% of primary teachers and 25% of post-primary teachers rated their ability as either 
“intermediate” or “advanced” with regard to using teaching and learning methods that are 
facilitated by ICT. Recently qualified teachers had a higher perception of their ICT skills than more 
experienced teachers. 

• At the primary level, the inspectors reported evidence of the use of ICT to facilitate teaching and 
learning in 59% of the classrooms visited. However, the inspectors observed ICT actually being 
used in only 22% of the lessons observed. Nearly a quarter of all inspections showed a 
competent or optimal level of performance in relation to the use of ICT in the classroom. 

xvi 



Executive summary 
• Where ICT is used in primary classrooms it predominates in core curricular areas, such as English 
and Mathematics, and in Social, Environmental and Scientific Education (SESE). 

• The evaluation found that many fifth-class students in primary schools do not have the 
competence to complete basic tasks on the computer. While most students reported being able 
to perform many of the most basic computer tasks, such as turning a computer on and off and 
opening or saving a file, more than 30% reported that they were not able to print a document or 
to go on the internet by themselves. Almost half (47%) reported not being able to create a 
document by themselves. The majority did not know how to create a presentation (72%), use a 
spreadsheet (86%), or send an attachment with an e-mail message (88%). Competence in the 
use of ICT is limited for the most part to basic ICT skills, centred on the use of word-processing. 

• Only 18% of the post-primary lessons observed by the inspectors involved an ICT-related activity. 
Students’ interaction with the technology was observed in only about a quarter of these 
instances. The most common ICT-related activity observed was the use of a data projector to 
make a presentation to a class group. Inspectors judged that effective integration of ICT in 
teaching and learning was occurring in approximately half of the lessons in which the use of ICT 
was observed (i.e. in approximately 11% of all lessons observed). 

• Dedicated ICT lessons at the post-primary level are more prevalent among first-year classes, and 
are provided less frequently as students progress towards the Junior Certificate. The majority of 
schools concentrate on providing students with such lessons in their Transition Year, in the LCVP, 
and in the LCA. 

• High levels of integration of ICT were found at the post-primary level in the science and applied 
science subjects and in subjects in the social studies I group.1 Subjects were also identified that 
rarely made use of ICT, the most notable being Irish. 

• The evaluation found that fifth-year students in post-primary schools had the confidence to 
perform many basic computer operations by themselves, for example saving, printing, deleting, 
opening and editing a document. However, it also found that they generally needed some 
assistance to perform more complicated tasks, such as moving files, copying files to external 
storage devices, and writing and sending e-mail. A relatively low proportion of these students 
reported being able to create a multimedia presentation. Students required most help with 
attaching a file to an e-mail message, constructing a web page, or dealing with computer viruses. 
While the post-primary inspectors generally commented positively on the students’ ICT work that 
they observed, they were also concerned that the tasks undertaken by the students were largely 
word-processing and presentation tasks. 

1 

Social Studies I group includes History; Geography; Art, Craft, and Design; and Music. Social Studies II group includes Religious 
Education; Physical Education; Civic, Social and Political Education (CSPE); and Social, Personal and Health Education (SPHE). 

xvii 



ICT in Schools 
• ICT is widely used to facilitate the provision by schools of special education. Generally, ICT is used 
more frequently by members of the special-education team rather than by mainstream class 
teachers. The emphasis in students’ engagement with ICT in special-education settings is mainly 
on the support of literacy. 

Support for ICT 

• The level of awareness among teachers of the ICT advisory service is generally low, with fewer 
than half the respondents at both the primary and the post-primary level reporting an awareness 
of it. Awareness is higher, however, among ICT co-ordinators than among other teachers. 

• The use of the ICT advisory service is also low. At the primary level only 22% of all respondents 
reported having used the service, while at the post-primary level the corresponding figure was 
15%. 

Summary of key recommendations for policy-makers and policy 
advisors 

• The level of ICT infrastructure in schools needs to be improved. Specifically, Ireland should be 
working towards equipping not just all schools but all classrooms with an appropriate level of ICT 
infrastructure. Consideration should be given to equipping all classrooms with a computer for use 
by the teacher, broadband internet access with adequate bandwidth, and a fixed data projector 
and screen for use by the teacher in presentations. Furthermore, to ensure appropriate access to 
ICT by students, Ireland should strive to reduce its student-computer ratio (SCR) from the present 

9.1:1 in primary schools and 7:1 in post-primary schools. International evidence suggests that 
countries that have taken a lead in this area are aiming for or achieving a ratio of 5:1 or less in all 
schools. 
• Improvements in ICT infrastructure will need to be supported by the introduction of a national 
ICT technical support and maintenance system for schools. Schools also need to be provided with 
the capacity to regularly upgrade their own ICT infrastructure. 

• The pedagogical dimension of the ICT advisors’ role in an education centre could be more 
appropriately provided by the relevant school support services, in liaison with the ICT school coordinators. 
The technical dimension of the ICT advisors’ role could be provided in a number of 
ways, including for example, by having a commercially supplied ICT maintenance and support for 
schools. With an effective IT maintenance system in place, the pedagogical role of ICT coordinators 
within schools could be enhanced and supported with appropriate training. 

xviii 



Executive summary 
• Support services should give priority to the integration of ICT in teaching and learning. There is 
an opportunity for such services to work more closely with schools, and with school ICT coordinators 
in particular, to determine staff training needs and assist in organising appropriate 
professional development courses for teachers. Support service personnel should aim to be 
proactive in providing examples of how ICT can be used to facilitate teaching and learning in any 
programmes provided. Furthermore, course organisers should take greater account of the wide 
range of ICT abilities and experiences commonly found in groups of teachers and should provide 
differentiated ICT learning experiences for course participants. 

• Additional guidance should be provided to schools and teachers of students with special 
educational needs so that the needs of learners may be matched more appropriately with the 
technology available. 

• There needs to be an increased emphasis on the application of ICT in teaching and learning in 
teacher education at pre-service, induction and continuing professional development stages. It is 
recommended that teacher education departments in third-level colleges should provide student 
teachers with the skills necessary to effectively use ICT in teaching and foster in them a culture of 
using ICT in their work. Consideration should also be given to extending and expanding 
significantly the current range of professional development courses available for teachers. A 
major focus of such an initiative should be on how ICT may be integrated fully in the teaching 
and learning of specific subjects and curricular areas. The ICT Framework for Schools, which the 
NCCA will issue in the near future, will be a further assistance to schools in this regard. 

Key recommendations for schools 

• Schools and teachers should regularly review the use of ICT in their work. In particular, they 
should strive to ensure greater integration of ICT within teaching and learning activities in 
classrooms and other settings. 

• Teachers should exploit the potential of ICT to develop as wide a range of students’ skills as 
possible, including the higher-order skills of problem-solving, synthesis, analysis, and evaluation. 

• Principals should encourage and facilitate suitable ICT training for teachers. Schools should liase 
with relevant support services and should endeavour to establish mechanisms to facilitate the 
sharing of good practice among members of the staff. 

• Schools should endeavour to provide all their students with an appropriate and equitable level of 
experience of ICT at all class levels: at the primary level and at both junior and senior cycle at the 
post-primary level. 

xix 



ICT in Schools 
• Schools should plan for the maintenance and upgrading of their ICT systems. 

• Computer rooms, where they exist, should be used to maximum effect. Staff members and 
students should be provided with adequate access to the internet. Post-primary schools in 
particular should aim to increase the permeation of ICT in general classrooms. 

• A designated staff member should be responsible for ICT development. An ICT plan should be 
developed, using a consultative process, and an appropriate-use policy (AUP) should also be 
established. 

• Teachers should endeavour to integrate ICT more in their planning and preparation for teaching. 

• Schools need to ensure that ICT is used to support students with special educational needs in the 
most effective and appropriate way. Schools need to ensure that they match students' needs to 
the most appropriate technology available, and that ICT is used to support not only the 
acquisition of literacy but the widest range of students' needs. 

• Schools should exploit the benefits to be had from ICT in their assessment procedures and also in 
their administrative practices. 

xx 



ICT in primary and post-primary education in Ireland 
Chapter 1 
1Part 1 
Introduction 
ICT in primary and post-primary education in Ireland 
Chapter 1 
1Part 1 
Introduction 

ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
1.1 Introduction 
Information and communications technology (ICT) is an accepted element in all our lives and has a 
central role to play in education. Since the appearance of the first Government policy on ICT in 
education in 1997, a substantial investment has been made in ICT facilities and training in Irish 
schools. In Ireland, as in other countries, the debate about ICT in education concentrates on the 
potential impact of ICT on teaching and learning and on the measures that need to be adopted to 
ensure that the potential of ICT to enrich students’ learning experience is realised. 

This Inspectorate report presents the findings of a major evaluation of the impact of ICT on teaching 
and learning in both primary and post-primary schools in Ireland. The evaluation set out to establish 
the extent to which ICT was used in the schools at both levels and, more importantly, to assess the 
impact ICT had on teaching and learning, including the ways in which ICT is used to facilitate the 
learning of students with special educational needs. The views of principals and teachers about their 
own ICT skills, and their opinions about the impact and future role of ICT in education, were sought 
during the evaluation. 

This chapter examines the background to the provision of ICT in Irish schools. It first seeks to place 
the development of ICT in education in the wider social and economic context. The policy context 
for the development of ICT in schools is then considered. The findings of the census of ICT 

2 



ICT in primary and post-primary education Chapter 1 
infrastructure (2005) carried out by the National Centre for Technology in Education (NCTE) are then 
reviewed. 

1.2 Background 
As the OECD has pointed out, ICT is now ubiquitous in the modern world (OECD, 2001). The OECD 
has reported that, in the twenty-one OECD countries for which data was available, employment in 
the ICT industry represented about 6.6% of total business employment (OECD, 2003). This 
translated into more than 16 million people employed in the industry. The European Union 
accounted for more than a third of this figure. 

The same OECD report noted that average employment growth in the ICT industry over the 
previous five years had been more than 4.3% annually, a figure that was more than three times that 
of business in general. A more recent and even more dramatic indicator of the growth in ICT, 
published by the OECD in 2006, shows an increase in broadband penetration of 33% in the OECD 
between June 2005 and June 2006 (OECD, 2006b). Similar statistics could be quoted for numerous 
indicators of the growth in ICT around the world. Such statistics provide irrefutable proof of the 
extent to which ICT is becoming an increasingly integral part of modern society, with ICT 
competence becoming increasingly important for effective participation in social and economic 
activity. 

In Ireland, no less than in other OECD countries, the impact of ICT on business and society generally 
has increased dramatically in recent years. In many respects Ireland has been a leader in the 
adoption of the technology and in capitalising on its potential to develop our economy. For 
example, in 2003 Ireland was the leading exporter of computer software, while, according to 
Eurostat, a third of all personal computers sold in Europe are manufactured in Ireland2. However, not 
all the indicators of progress towards a knowledge economy are as positive. The 2006 OECD report 
referred to above showed that Ireland was 24th out of 30 OECD countries in broadband 
penetration. It is clear that, at least in certain areas, Ireland still has some way to go to be a leader in 
the field of ICT. 

The increasing permeation of ICT in all aspects of modern life has led to the concept of a 
“knowledge-based society,” one aspect of which is the knowledge-based economy3. It is now 
widely accepted that the future prosperity of the country is predicated on our ability to develop a 
knowledge-based economy. Arising from the Lisbon agenda4, the development of such an economy 
is the stated aim of the Government. The Technology Foresight Reports recommended that the 
Government establish a major fund to develop Ireland as a centre for world-class research excellence 
in ICT and biotechnology (Irish Council for Science Technology and Innovation, 1999). As part of its 

2 Statistical Office of the European Communities. 
3 It [a knowledge-based economy] may be defined as an economy in which the generation and the exploitation of knowledge has 

come to play the predominant part in the creation of wealth. (Accenture, 2004) 
4 

The European Council of Heads of State and Governments held in Lisbon in 2000 set as a strategic goal that the European Union 
should become the world’s most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy by 2010. The programme of reforms intended 
to implement this goal is referred to as the Lisbon Agenda or the Lisbon Process. 

3 



ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
response, the Government initiated the Technology Foresight Fund of more than €700 million in 
2000. Science Foundation Ireland (SFI) was created to administer this fund, first as a sub-group 
within Forfás5 and subsequently on a statutory basis. In its Strategy for Science, Technology and 
Innovation, 2006–2013, published in June 2006 (p.8), the Government committed itself to building 
on the achievements of SFI over the previous six years and reiterated its vision for the development 
of Ireland as a knowledge-based economy (Department of Enterprise Trade and Employment, 2006). 

Ireland by 2013 will be internationally renowned for the excellence of its research, and will be to the 
forefront in generating and using new knowledge for economic and social progress, within an innovation 
driven culture. 

This commitment was reiterated in the current social partnership agreement, Towards 2016 
(Department of the Taoiseach, 2006). In the section on education and training (p.31), one of the 
specific short-term commitments within the first phase is that “all children will have the opportunity 
to become ICT literate by completion of second level.” This commitment to the development of ICT 
underlines an appreciation of the fundamental role played by ICT in a knowledge-based economy. 

The critical sector which underpins and enables the transition to a knowledge-based economy is the ICT 
sector which provides the ability to create, store and distribute knowledge more cheaply than ever in 
human history. The ICT sector essentially enables the existence and growth of the knowledge-based 
economy (Accenture, 2004). 

The world of education has not been immune to the development of ICT. As Michael Kompf (2005), 
in a review of a number of books on the subject, notes, “each author assumes ICT as a permanent 
feature in the landscape of teaching and learning”. The “ICT and education” page of the SURF6 
web site takes this a step further when it says that 

It is no longer possible nowadays to conceive of education without information and communications 
technology (ICT). One can go even further by pointing out that education is increasingly being defined by 
ICT. 

Much has been achieved in recent years in developing the ICT infrastructure in schools. This 
infrastructural development has required significant levels of investment, primarily by the State but 
also by individual schools and institutions. Given the level of investment of both time and finance, as 
described in this report, the need for a thorough evaluation of the impact of ICT in schools was 
clear. 

As pointed out by the OECD (2001) and others, there are three main rationales for promoting the 
use of ICT in schools, namely the economic, the social, and the pedagogical. These, of course, are 
not mutually exclusive. The first two derive directly from the proliferation of ICT in the modern 
world, referred to earlier. As described above, the economic imperative for promoting ICT in schools 
is well recognised in Ireland, as it is in other developed countries. The National Competitiveness 

5 Forfás is the national policy and advisory board for enterprise, trade, science, technology, and innovation. It operates under the 
auspices of the Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment. 

6 

SURF is the Dutch higher education and research partnership organisation for network services and for information and 
communications technology. 

4 



ICT in primary and post-primary education Chapter 1 
Council7, in its Annual Competitiveness Report for 2006, comments that “better use of ICT has 
been identified as one of the key factors required to improve Ireland’s productivity performance.” 
The report went on to point out that, while Ireland’s expenditure per capita on ICT was slightly 
above the EU 15 average, Ireland ranked ninth of the EU 15 countries in expenditure per capita on 
ICT. 

While funding for research has increased dramatically in recent years, the Expert Group on Future 
Skills Needs (EGFSN) continues to warn of shortfalls in the output of graduates in ICT. A submission 
to the Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment in October 2005 by the EGFSN and Forfás 
notes that “existing EGFSN forecasts suggest that there will be significant shortages of graduates 
with ICT backgrounds in the period up to 2010” (Forfás, 2005). 

Though ICT is a vital sector of the economy, requiring highly skilled professionals, it nevertheless 
represents only a relatively small fraction of total employment. However, in the knowledge economy, 
as it is now and more so as it will be in the future, ICT competence is a prerequisite for employees in 
virtually every area. Furthermore, the need for a facility with ICT is not confined to the work 
environment but increasingly permeates all aspects of everyday life, including home and leisure. The 
social imperative for promoting ICT in schools, therefore, is clear: if students are to be prepared to 
lead fulfilled and productive lives in a knowledge-based society they should be ICT-competent on 
leaving the school system. 

The pedagogical rationale for promoting ICT in schools is concerned with the use of ICT in teaching 
and learning. It is intimately related, therefore, to the economic and social rationales, but ICT also 
has additional application in the teaching and learning process. It provides teachers with a range of 
new tools to facilitate traditional pedagogies; it also and perhaps more importantly, presents the 
teacher with the potential to develop new teaching methods. For the student growing up in a 
culture of all-pervasive technology, ICT provides new, and more exciting and relevant, learning 
opportunities. 

In 2002 a report by the Information Society Commission (ISC) noted that, compared with major 
competitors, Ireland lagged some distance in the application of ICT in education (Information 
Society Commission, 2002).8 The report recommended that basic ICT skills should, as far as possible, 
become a core component of mainstream education. The ISC made a number of recommendations 
to the Government, including: 
• priority for capital investment in ICT in schools 
• a commitment to establishing broadband connectivity for schools and other centres of learning 
• provision of technical support for the education system 
• integration of ICT in the curriculum 
• a review of ICT in teacher education, both pre-service and in-service. 

7 The National Competitiveness Council was established in 1997 as a social partnership body and reports to the Taoiseach on 
competitiveness issues facing the economy. 

8 

The Information Society Commission was an independent advisory body to the Government, reporting directly to the Taoiseach. The 
last commission served from November 2001 to December 2004. 

5 



ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
Developing an education system responsive to the demands of a knowledge-based society presents 
challenges for all the participants in education. Not the least of these challenges is the need for 
significant additional funding to provide the necessary infrastructure to facilitate the development of 
ICT in the classroom. The technical support and maintenance of this infrastructure, when it exists, is 
also a challenge and is an issue for many schools (as discussed in later chapters of this report). As 
noted above, ICT provides teachers with opportunities to develop new teaching methods. However, 
to realise the potential of ICT to expand their methodological repertoire, most teachers require 
continuing professional development and support in the use of the relevant technologies. Teachers 
in specific subject areas also require support in responding to the demands presented by the 
inclusion of ICT in revised syllabuses. At the school level the integration of ICT in teaching and 
learning puts additional demands on timetabling as schools expand their curriculum to include 
dedicated ICT lessons, particularly at the post-primary level, while ensuring equitable access to ICT 
facilities for students in the context of subject-specific requirements. 

1.3 ICT policy and investment in education 
The importance of developing ICT in education and responding to the challenges outlined in the 
previous section has been recognised by the Government for more than a decade. The White Paper 
on education Charting Our Education Future (1995) stated as one of the objectives of the junior 
cycle curriculum that “all students . . . will have achieved . . . competence and understanding in 
practical skills, including computer literacy and information technology.” In 1997 the Government 
published its first policy document on ICT in education, entitled Schools IT 2000. The publication of 
this policy document led in 1998 to the introduction of the ICT in Schools Initiative. This initiative 
established the basis for the development of ICT in the education system. 

1.3.1 Policy for ICT in education 
In 1998 the National Centre for Technology in Education (NCTE) was established, with a brief to 
implement the Schools IT 2000 initiative. The NCTE’s brief also included the development of ICT 
policy proposals and the provision of ICT policy advice to the Department of Education and Science. 

The Schools IT 2000 initiative had three major strands: 
• the Technology Integration Initiative 
• the Teaching Skills Initiative 
• the Schools Support Initiative, including 

—the Schools Integration Project (SIP) 

—Scoilnet. 

The role of ICT in supporting children with special educational needs was a feature of all the IT 2000 
initiatives. 

6 



ICT in primary and post-primary education Chapter 1 ICT in primary and post-primary education Chapter 1 
The Technology Integration Initiative was designed to support schools in developing their ICT 
infrastructure. Schools received grants for the purchase of computer hardware, and those schools 
that did not already have an internet connection were assisted in getting on line. (See section 1.3.3.) 
The aim of the Technology Integration Initiative was to have at least 60,000 computers in schools by 
the end of 2001. In the following year the NCTE census reported that there were some 84,000 
computers in Irish schools. 

The Teaching Skills Initiative recognised that there was little point in putting computers in schools 
unless teachers were trained in their use. This initiative provided for teacher training in three distinct 
areas, namely ICT skills and awareness, professional skills development in ICT, and pedagogical skills 
development. 

The Schools Integration Project dealt with whole-school development and investigated a range of 
teaching and learning topics with regard to ICT integration. Approximately ninety pilot projects were 
established in a number of “lead” schools, which worked in partnership with education centres, 
businesses, industry, third-level institutions, and the community. Most of the individual projects 
implemented as part of the SIP concluded in 2001 and 2002, and the remainder were completed in 
2004. 

The Scoilnet initiative is responsible for the promotion and use of the internet and ICT in education. 
The main emphasis of this initiative is on the development of the Scoilnet web site (www.scoilnet.ie) 

7 



ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
as a resource for teachers and students. Resource materials for the web site are reviewed by a panel 
of subject experts, thus ensuring their appropriateness for use in Irish classrooms. The Scoilnet web 
site is the Department of Education and Science’s official portal for Irish education. The Scoilnet 
initiative is also responsible for the development and maintenance of the NCTE web site, which 
provides comprehensive advice and support on all aspects of ICT in education as well as serving as a 
notice-board for the NCTE’s activities. 

Schools IT 2000 envisaged that ICT advisors would be appointed in education centres to support the 
work of the NCTE by providing leadership, training and support, including on-line support, at the 
regional level and by providing regular feedback on progress and issues arising. Ultimately some 
twenty ICT advisors (later increased to twenty-one)—one in each of the full-time education 
centres—were appointed. The main role of these advisors may be summarised as follows: 
• to advise and support teachers in their region in integrating ICT in their teaching and in their 

students’ learning 
• to build a knowledge base on all matters relating to the use of ICT in their local schools. 

A report on the implementation of Schools IT 2000 published in 2001 revealed a high level of 
satisfaction with the initiatives implemented under IT 2000 (National Policy Advisory and 
Development Committee)9. The report, however, identified three issues of concern: 
• the need for more training for teachers 
• the need for more funding (equipment and computers, maintenance, support) 
• the need for more support (technical support, encouragement to use ICT). 

Based on its findings, the committee made recommendations covering a range of areas, including 
policy, funding, the professional development of teachers, pre-service teacher education, 
infrastructure, and technical support. 

In 2001 the Government launched its second policy document on ICT in education, A Blueprint for 
the Future of ICT in Irish Education. This was a three-year strategic plan designed to support the 
continuation of the main initiatives begun under IT 2000 and to build on the progress achieved 
under that plan. The main objectives of the Blueprint policy were to: 
• expand ICT capital provision to schools 
• increase access to, and the use of, internet technologies 
• further integrate ICT in teaching and learning 
• enhance professional development opportunities for teachers. 

While support for children with special educational needs was a feature of all earlier initiatives under 
IT 2000, the Blueprint gave priority to provision for these students. A further focus of the Blueprint 
was planning for ICT at the school level. Arising from this focus, the NCTE in 2002 published a 
planning pack entitled ICT Planning and Advice for Schools. This pack was designed to facilitate 

9 

The National Policy Advisory and Development Committee (NPADC) was set up in 1998 under Schools IT 2000 to assist the NCTE in 
its work. The committee included representation from the education and social partners. 

8 



ICT in primary and post-primary education Chapter 1 
schools in developing ICT plans to meet the infrastructural and other ICT-related needs of their 
individual schools. 

1.3.2 ICT in the curriculum 
The revised Primary School Curriculum was launched in 1999. The introduction to the curriculum 
states: 

Technological skills are increasingly important for advancement in education, work, and leisure. The 
curriculum integrates ICT into the teaching and learning process and provides children with opportunities 
to use modern technology to enhance their learning in all subjects (Department of Education and 
Science, 1999, p. 29). 

As this statement suggests, ICT in the primary curriculum is seen primarily as a tool for facilitating 
teaching and learning throughout the curriculum, rather than as a subject in its own right. The 
teacher guidelines that accompany the curriculum document for each area provide detailed 
suggestions on how ICT can be used to best effect in the teaching and learning of the particular 
subject. Thus, for example, the teacher guidelines for English open the section on ICT with the 
statement: 

Computers and other items of information and communication technologies enrich the teaching and 
learning of language considerably. The following are among some of the ways in which they may be 
used. 

The guidelines then go on to list some eight ways in which ICT might be used, from CD-based 
reference materials to the internet and e-mail. In 2004 the National Council for Curriculum and 
Assessment (NCCA) completed a comprehensive set of guidelines for teachers on the use of ICT 
(National Council for Curriculum and Assessment, 2004a). These guidelines were designed to 
complement the teacher guidelines provided with the different subjects in the Primary School 
Curriculum while reflecting developments in ICT since the launch of the curriculum five years earlier. 
In a discussion document published in the same year the NCCA set out seven key principles for 
guiding learners’ use of ICT (National Council for Curriculum and Assessment, 2004b, pp. 31-34), 
which adds value to the curriculum when it facilitates: 
• students’ active involvement in their own learning 
• the development of students’ higher-order thinking skills 
• students’ learning in authentic environments 
• students’ interest and engagement in learning 
• differentiated learning for all students 
• collaborative learning 
• assessment of and for learning. 

At the post-primary level, computers were first introduced as a course of study to the curriculum in 
1980, when an optional computer studies module was included in the Leaving Certificate 

9 



ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
Mathematics syllabus. Schools are required to develop their own syllabus for this option within 
broad parameters laid down by the DES (Department of Education and Science, 2006). The module 
is not examinable, but students who complete it satisfactorily are issued with a certificate by the 
DES. While only minor modifications have been made to the published course parameters since its 
introduction in 1980, anecdotal evidence suggests that the emphasis in those schools that continue 
to provide the module has shifted significantly towards the development of skills in such areas as 
word-processing and spreadsheets. 

When the Leaving Certificate computer studies module was introduced in 1980 it was intended that 
this would be a first step in the development of computer studies in the post-primary curriculum. In 
1985 a computer studies course was introduced in the junior cycle. Unlike the senior-cycle module, 
no certification is provided for those who complete this course. The national survey of school 
principals reported that only 13% of them were providing this course. (See chapter 6.) 

Neither of the computer studies courses has been revised since their introduction, nor has there 
been any further development of computer studies courses, as such, as part of the curriculum in 
either the junior or the senior cycle. However, in the LCA programme there are two courses in 
information and communications technology. All students in the programme must complete a two-
module course entitled Introduction to Information and Communications. In addition they may 
choose, as one of their vocational specialisms, a four-module course in information and 
communications technology. Like all the vocational specialisms, this latter course is assessed in a 
written examination at the end of year 2. In 2007 this examination was taken by some 1,155 
candidates, or 38% of the Leaving Certificate examination candidates who had followed the LCA 
programme. 

While the computer studies modules introduced in the 1980s were seen as independent subjects, 
with an emphasis on computer programming, more recent trends have concentrated on the cross-
curricular applications of ICT. Many of the revised syllabuses introduced in recent years have 
included references to the relevant applications of ICT in the subject area as well as to the more 
general applications of ICT to teaching and learning. For example, the teacher guidelines that 
accompany the revised Junior Certificate Science syllabus, introduced in 2003, have a section on 
“Using ICT in the teaching and learning of Science.” At the Leaving Certificate level one of the 
stated aims of the Geography syllabus, introduced in 2004, is “to encourage the use of information 
and communication technology in the teaching and learning of Geography.” This syllabus also 
contains several other references to specific uses of ICT in the teaching and learning of the subject. 
In the LCVP, in addition to the use of ICT in specific subject areas, students are required to use ICT in 
the preparation and presentation of their portfolios. In Transition Year, many schools provide courses 
in ICT-related areas; these include such courses as “Computer Science”, “Computer Applications” 
and “Information Technology”. 

10 



ICT in primary and post-primary education Chapter 1 
As part of its work on the place of ICT in the post-primary curriculum, the National Council for 
Curriculum and Assessment commissioned research in the area. This resulted in two research reports 
being presented to the NCCA by the University of Limerick. The first study found that there was 
overwhelming support from both the education system and industry for the introduction of a 
computer-based subject to the Established Leaving Certificate programme (O'Doherty et al., 2000). 
The primary reason put forward by respondents for introducing such a subject was the promotion of 
“computer literacy.” The second study investigated the preferred nature of an ICT-related subject in 
more depth (O'Doherty, et al., 2001). This study reported general agreement on the need to 
introduce provision for “computer literacy” for all students as the first priority. However, there was 
no agreement on how best this might be achieved. The findings of the University of Limerick study 
were discussed at length by NCCA committees. The principal reasons for not proceeding with the 
development of a discrete Leaving Certificate subject were concerned with the inequalities likely to 
emanate from such a decision. Committees agreed that equity of access for all students would be 
compromised, as a discrete subject would, of necessity, be optional. 

The NCCA has now adopted a twin-track approach to promoting ICT in the curriculum. Firstly, it 
aims to facilitate the development of students’ competence in using ICT through its inclusion in 
revised syllabuses and in teacher guidelines. For example, ICT features significantly in the revised 
Leaving Certificate Design and Communications Graphics syllabus and also in its assessment. It also 
arises as a focus of learning in the core of the new LC Technology syllabus. Secondly, the NCCA 
aims to promote ICT as a resource for teaching and learning throughout the curriculum. It is now 
developing a “Framework for ICT in Curriculum and Assessment” for primary schools and for the 
junior cycle of post-primary schools. The ICT framework is not designed as a course in ICT but 
instead is intended to be a cross-curricular support for schools and teachers in developing their 
students’ competence in ICT. It is presented in four inter-related areas of learning, encompassing 
such attributes as basic knowledge and skills, communication, collaboration, and critical thinking 
and creativity. The framework is at present being tested in a number of schools, with resources and 
training being provided. It is hoped to have the framework and support materials ready for use in 
schools in September 2008. 

1.3.3 Investment in ICT in education 
Since the introduction of the ICT in Schools Initiative in 1998 the Government has made a 
substantial investment in the integration of ICT in teaching and learning. As manifested in the NCTE 
census described later in this chapter, this investment has resulted in significant progress in the 
development of ICT infrastructure in schools. 

Each of the policy initiatives described in the previous section was supported by substantial funding. 
The details of this funding are summarised in table 1.1. 

11 



ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
Table 1.1: Funding of ICT in education policy initiatives 

Initiative Year begun Funding 
Schools IT 2000: A Policy Framework for the New Millennium 1998 €52 million 
Blueprint for the Future of ICT in Irish Schools 2001 €78 million 
Networking Schools 2004 €23 million10 
Schools Broadband Programme 2005 €30 million11 

From the 2005/06 school year schools are being provided with broadband internet access as part of 
a joint project between the Government and the Telecommunications and Internet Federation of the 
Irish Business and Employers' Confederation. The local schools connectivity is being provided by 
means of a Schools National Broadband Network. This network and the support services to schools 
are managed by the National Centre for Technology in Education and supported by HEAnet. The 
total costs of the Schools Broadband Programme, including the initial set-up and continuing costs to 
June 2008, are estimated to amount to approximately €30 million. 

1.4 ICT infrastructure census in schools (2005) 
Beginning in 1998, the NCTE conducted a number of censuses of ICT infrastructure in schools. The 
most recent of these, the fourth since 1998, was carried out in May and June 2005. The previous 
census was carried out in 2002. The report of the 2005 census gives a valuable insight into the 
development of the ICT infrastructure in schools at both primary and post-primary level (Shiel & 
O’Flaherty, 2006). In so doing it presents an overview of the results of Government investment in 
ICT while at the same time providing an indication of the need for further investment in the future. 
The census report provides a comprehensive overview of the ICT infrastructure in schools. The 
remainder of this section gives a summary of the salient features of the report. 

1.4.1 Computers in schools 
The NCTE census (2005) shows that since the previous census (2002) there was an increase of 
approximately 15% in the number of computers in schools. Allowing for schools that did not 
respond to the census, the total number of working computers in schools was estimated to be 
97,709. These were approximately equally divided between primary and post-primary schools. 
However, as there are almost four-and-a-half times as many primary schools as post-primary schools, 
the number of computers per school is correspondingly lower at primary level. 

The census also collected data on the location of computers in schools. In primary schools and 
special schools approximately half the computers are in general classrooms. In post-primary schools 
only 4% of computers are in general classrooms; in those schools almost 60% of computers are in 

10 Expenditure to August 2007. 
11 Estimated cost of set-up and continuing costs to June 2008. 

12 



ICT in primary and post-primary education Chapter 1 
computer rooms. Computers at post-primary level were also found in a range of specialist rooms, 
such as science laboratories and technology rooms. The low penetration of computers in general 
classrooms at post-primary level was commented on in the evaluation reports provided by 
inspectors. (This is discussed in chapter 6.) 

Rather than the number of computers per school, a more appropriate indicator of the penetration 
of the technology in schools is the student-computer ratio (SCR).12 The SCR in 2005 for the three 
school sectors – primary, post-primary, and special schools – is shown in table 1.2. The table also 
shows the corresponding figures from the previous two censuses, in 2002 and 2000. It is clear from 
table 1.2 that there has been a significant improvement in the SCR over the past five years, 
particularly at primary level. At post-primary level the improvement is less marked, though still 
significant. 

Table 1.2: Student-computer ratio (SCR) in each school sector in given years 

Primary Post-primary Special 
2005 

9.1 

7.0 

3.1 

2002 

11.3 

7.4 

3.8 

2000 

16.3 

10.9 

5.7 

While the improvement in the SCR is welcome, the ratio is still substantially below international 
standards. For example, in 2003 the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD) Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) gathered data on the numbers of 
computers in schools.13 At that time the OECD calculated a SCR for post-primary schools in Ireland 
of 9:1. This compared with an OECD average of 6:1. The SCR for the United States was 3:1, while 
for a number of other countries, including Hungary and (South) Korea, it was 4:1. As can be seen 
from table 1.2, the SCR at post-primary level in Ireland was estimated to be 7:1 in 2005. However, 
this is still approximately twice what it was two years earlier in the other countries mentioned, and it 
is likely that those countries will also have shown improvements in the interim. 

As noted above, the stock of working computers in schools has increased significantly in recent 
years. However, this technology is changing rapidly, and what was considered “state of the art” in 
2000 is now of limited value for running modern software. The NCTE report shows that in primary 
schools almost 29% of computers are more than six years old. The corresponding figures for post-
primary and special schools are 19% and 21%, respectively. While these computers may be 
adequate for basic tasks, such as word-processing, they are not capable of running much modern 
software, and as computers age they become prone to technical problems. 

12 The student-computer ratio (SCR) is the number of students enrolled in a school divided by the number of computers in the school. 
See note 19 (chapter 2) for further details. 

13 PISA is administered to fifteen-year-old pupils, and therefore the data refers to post-primary schools. 

13 



ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
1.4.2 Other ICT equipment in schools 
The NCTE census gathered data on other aspects of schools’ ICT infrastructure as well as computers. 
The most commonly found ICT equipment after the computer was a scanner. This equipment was 
found in more than 80% of schools across all sectors, with close to 90% of post-primary schools 
reporting having a scanner. The next most commonly found items of equipment across all sectors 
were printers and digital (still) cameras. While printers were commonly found across all sectors laser 
printers were much more common in post-primary schools, with almost 90% of those schools 
having a laser printer, compared with 38% of primary schools. 

Post-primary schools were also better equipped in a number of other areas. Not surprisingly, very 
few primary or special schools had a data-logger, while almost half the post-primary schools had this 
equipment. Perhaps more notable is the discrepancy in the availability of data projectors, particularly 
fixed data projectors, as illustrated in table 1.3. It is also worth noting the low penetration of 
interactive whiteboards. Only 5% of post-primary schools had an interactive whiteboard, while the 
corresponding figures for special schools and primary schools were 3% and 2%, respectively. 

Table 1.3: Proportion of schools having at least one fixed and one mobile data projector 

Primary schools Post-primary schools Special schools 
Mobile data projector 31% 78% 28% 
Fixed data projector 6% 51% 5% 

14 



ICT in primary and post-primary education Chapter 1 
In relation to special-needs provision, the report shows that, outside of the special schools, there is 
relatively little provision of assistive technology devices. For example, “other computer control 
devices (e.g. touch-screens, alternative mice and keyboards)” were reported in only 13% of schools 
at both primary and post-primary level, compared with 55% of special schools. That such devices 
are more commonly found in special schools is not, of course, a surprise. 

While the NCTE report does show a low penetration of some ICTs relative to other countries, as 
discussed above, it also shows that, in relation to at least some of the technologies, there have been 
significant improvements since 2002. For example, the proportion of primary schools that have at 
least one data projector, either fixed or mobile, more than doubled, from 16.5% in 2002 to 36.4% 
in 2005. A similar increase was reported in special schools: from 13.3% in 2002 to 30.4% in 2005. 
The increase in post-primary schools was much less marked, primarily because most of these schools 
(84%) already had a data projector in 2002. In 2005 some 93% of post-primary schools had a least 
one data projector. 

In contrast to the increasing prevalence of data projectors the change in the adoption of interactive 
whiteboards has been very slow. This technology was reported in about 2% of primary schools and 
5% of post-primary schools in both 2002 and 2005. By contrast, a survey by the Department for 
Education and Skills in England in 2004 estimated that 63% of primary schools had interactive 
whiteboards, while the corresponding figure in secondary schools was 92%. 

1.4.3 Expenditure on ICT and technical support 
As referred to earlier in this chapter, the DES has provided financial support to schools for 
developing their infrastructure. The NCTE census sought to establish the level of expenditure by 
schools in addition to grants received from the Department. The response rate to the questions 
relating to expenditure by schools was relatively low, with the proportion of non-respondents 
ranging from 20% to 45%. As the report suggests, data on schools’ expenditure must therefore be 
interpreted with caution. 

For schools that did respond to the relevant question, the average additional expenditure on ICT in 
the previous full financial year was €2,129 per school for primary schools, €11,583 for post-primary 
schools, and €5,679 for special schools. 

In relation to technical support, the average amount spent by responding schools was €741 for 
primary schools, €3,765 for post-primary schools, and €1,239 for special schools. As the report 
notes, approximately one-third of spending on ICTs was allocated to technical support at primary 
and post-primary level and about one-fifth in special schools. 

15 



ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
1.4.4 Other areas covered in the census 
Other areas examined in the NCTE census included networking, ICT planning, the professional 
development of staff members, the certification of students, technical support and maintenance, 
and use of the internet. 

1.5 Summary 
That ICT should be an integral part of the education system is no longer a matter for debate. 
Students must be provided with the opportunity to develop the competence required to equip them 
for life in a knowledge-based society, while teachers cannot afford to ignore the potential of ICT for 
enhancing teaching and learning in their classrooms. Yet achieving an appropriate level of 
integration of ICT in teaching and learning presents a number of challenges. These range from the 
provision of the necessary physical resources to issues of curriculum development and assessment 
and the professional development of teachers. The remainder of this report describes the current 
stage of development of ICT in primary and post-primary schools. It presents examples of good 
practice as well as areas of concern and provides a series of recommendations for policy-makers and 
schools that, if implemented, would serve to enhance the learning experience of the young people 
in our schools. 

16 



Evaluation methods 
Chapter 2 
17Evaluation methods 
Chapter 2 
17

ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
2.1 Introduction 
The Inspectorate’s evaluation on which this report is based took place in both primary and post-
primary schools in the school year 2005/06.14 This chapter begins by looking at different approaches 
to evaluating ICT in schools and proceeds by giving an overview of the present evaluation. The 
purpose and aims of the evaluation are explained, and the research methods used are also 
described. An outline of the reporting procedures that pertained to the evaluations in schools is also 
given. 

2.2 Approaches to evaluating ICT in schools 
The pivotal role of ICT in the development of the knowledge economy is widely recognised. As 
described in chapter 1, there has been substantial investment in ICT in education over the past 
decade. Ireland, of course, is not unique in this respect: the integration of ICT in teaching and 
learning has been a feature of education systems in developed countries for many years. Given this 
level of investment, and the importance of ICT in a modern knowledge society, it is important that 
the impact of that investment be evaluated to establish the extent to which students’ learning and 
skills are being enhanced. 

14 Special schools were not included as part of the evaluation. 

18 



Evaluation methods Chapter 2 
Almost a decade ago Barton (1998) remarked, in relation to Britain, that “despite the massive 
investment of time and money in information technology it is difficult to get clear evidence of 
‘value-added’ in relation to IT use in our schools.” More recently, despite continued high levels of 
investment, Tearle (2004) noted that, “even today, the regular use of ICT by the majority of staff 
[members] and students within any one school is not commonplace”. In Britain the Office for 
Standards in Education, while noting that the importance of ICT as a tool for learning is now widely 
recognised, pointed out that “the government’s aim for ICT to become embedded in the work of 
schools is a reality in only a small minority of schools” (Ofsted, 2004). 

One type of ICT evaluation that is widely undertaken is the evaluation of the infrastructural 
development in schools. The NCTE censuses (which are referred to in chapters 1 and 3) are an 
example of this type of evaluation. This is an essential type of evaluation, and such statistics as the 
student-computer ratio are a useful indicator of the permeation of ICT in schools. However, it is a 
mistake to equate the availability of hardware with its productive use. To do so is an example of 
what Papert (1990) refers to as “technocentric” thinking and raises the question, “What 
contribution do these computers make to achieving the stated goals of education?” 

A different approach was that adopted by the authors of the Impact2 report, who investigated the 
correlation between the use of computers and attainment in National Tests and General Certificate 
of Secondary Education (GCSE) results in Britain (Harrison et al., 2003). That research set out to 
determine whether or not those students who used and were familiar with computers attained 
better results in national tests than their counterparts who did not. 

The most common qualitative approach to assessing the impact of ICT is by observation of teaching 
and learning in classrooms. This is the approach normally adopted by school inspectorates. The 
report by the Office for Standards in Education referred to earlier was based mainly on visits to 
schools by inspectors between April 2002 and December 2003. A similar approach was adopted in 
the development of school portraits as part of the European Research Network for ICT in Schools of 
Tomorrow (ERNIST) project, the purpose of which was to identify and disseminate examples of 
innovative uses of ICT in the classroom. Van Oel (2004) reported that, in addition to observing 
classroom practice, inspectors examined school planning documents and discussed the issues and 
their findings with the wider school community. 

Haydn (2001) has pointed out that the types of ICT that may add value to a lesson vary from subject 
to subject. Similarly, some evaluation techniques may have specific applicability. For example, Barton 
(1997) carried out a study in which he compared the time students spent drawing graphs manually 
with the time taken using data-logging equipment. This type of comparative study seems attractive, 
as it appears to have the potential to demonstrate “added value” through the use of ICT. 

The present evaluation may be described as a combination of the quantitative and the qualitative. 

19 



ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
The combination of the two approaches was designed to provide a more comprehensive overview 
of the impact of ICT in schools. 

2.3 Overview and aims of the evaluation 
There has been little published research evidence on the efficacy of ICT initiatives in schools in 
Ireland, particularly with regard to teaching and its impact on students’ learning. This report aims to 
bridge that gap. The aim of this evaluation was to assess the impact that ICT is having on education 
in primary and post-primary schools. The evaluation also sought to assess the knowledge, skills, 
attitudes and beliefs of teachers and students in relation to the use of ICT in the teaching and 
learning process and in schools in general. The objectives of the evaluation may be summarised as 
follows: 
• to assess the extent of the use of ICT in primary and post-primary schools 
• to evaluate the impact of ICT on teaching and learning 
• to assess the ICT skills of students at selected points in the education system 
• to obtain the views of principals and teachers about their ICT skills and their opinions about the 

impact and future role of ICT in education 
• to assess the extent to which ICT is used to support students with special educational needs 
• to make recommendations that will inform the development of Department of Education and 

Science policy. 

The evaluation examined the availability of ICT in schools, the extent to which ICT was being used 
by teachers to enhance and expand their teaching methods, and the extent to which students used 
ICT to help them to learn, to obtain access to information, or for communication purposes. Evidence 
was collected from a number of sources: 
• a national survey of primary (234) and post-primary (110) principals that elicited their views on 

the level and use of ICT in schools 

• a national survey of primary (1,162) and post-primary (800) teachers designed to examine their 
beliefs about the effectiveness of computers and other forms of ICT in contributing to education. 
The teachers were also asked about their own skill levels in using computers and the degree to 
which computers were used to support implementation of the curriculum 

• visits by inspectors to a sample of case-study primary and post-primary schools to evaluate ICT 
provision (32 primary schools and 20 post-primary schools) 

• a questionnaire for students, administered by the inspectors during their evaluation visits to the 
case-study schools. The questionnaires asked students about the frequency with which they used 
computers at home and at school, the extent to which they believed they could perform basic 
operations with computers, and their expectations about whether their future studies or career 
would involve significant use of ICT 

• the use by inspectors of ICT review schedules during classroom inspections as part of whole


20 



Evaluation methods Chapter 2 
school evaluation (WSE) at primary level (77 schools) and during subject inspections at post-

primary level (111 schools).15 

This report presents analyses of quantitative and qualitative data collected from principals, teachers, 
students and inspectors at primary and post-primary level. Taken together, this wide range of data 
sources provided a much richer data set than would have been possible from any one source alone. 
It also allowed for cross-referencing and the triangulation of evidence. 

2.4 National survey of primary and post-primary 
principals and teachers 
During the period October–December 2005 a national postal survey of school principals and 
teachers was conducted. 

2.4.1 Survey sampling methods 
A total eligible population of 3,024 primary schools16 and 711 post-primary schools17 were identified 
for participation in the surveys of principals and teachers. On the assumption of a minimum 
response rate of 40% from each sector a systematic sample of 260 schools was taken from the 
primary school population with a view to obtaining a statistically valid sample of at least 100 
schools, while a sample of 155 schools was taken from the post-primary school population with a 
view to obtaining a statistically valid sample of at least 50 schools. Both school samples were 
selected using the following stratifying variables: 

(1) region (North and Dublin North, South-East and Dublin South, West and Mid-West, South, 
Midlands, and Dublin West)18 
(2) school size (small, medium, large) 
(3) school type (mixed, all boys, all girls) 
(4) student-computer ratio (low, medium, high, not known)19 
(5) disadvantaged status. 
15 See www.education.ie for information and related publications on whole-school evaluations in primary and post-primary schools and 
on subject inspections in post-primary schools. 

16 There were 3,284 recognised primary schools in Ireland in the 2005/06 school year, but special schools and those schools participating 
in whole-school evaluations at the time of the postal survey were excluded. 

17 There were 735 recognised post-primary schools in Ireland in the 2005/06 school year, but those participating in whole-school 
evaluations at the time of the postal survey were excluded. 

18 North and Dublin North Region (Cos. Cavan, Donegal, Dublin (Fingal), Dublin (North), Leitrim, Louth, Meath, Monaghan, Sligo); 
South-East and Dublin South Region (Cos. Carlow, Dublin South, Dún Laoghaire and Rathdown, Kildare (North), Kilkenny, Wexford, 
Wicklow); West and Mid-West Region (Cos. Clare, Galway, Limerick, Mayo, Roscommon, Tipperary (North); South Region (Cos. Cork, 
Kerry, Tipperary (South), Waterford); Midlands and Dublin West Region (Cos. Dublin (West and South-West), Kildare (South), Laois, 
Longford, Offaly, Westmeath). 

19 The student-computer ratio (SCR) for a school is the total number of students enrolled divided by the number of computers in the 
school. The median SCR for all primary schools sampled was approximately 9.7 students per computer. Accordingly, a school with 
fewer than 9.7 students per computer was classified as having a low SCR (more favourable), while a school with more than 9.7 
students per computer was classified as having a high SCR. The SCR was obtained from the NCTE census (2005), and a SCR was 
available for 92 % of all schools sampled. In the case of post-primary schools the median SCR for those sampled was approximately 

7.4. Accordingly, a school with fewer than 7.4 students per computer was classified as having a low SCR (more favourable), while a 
school with more than 7.4 students per computer was classified as having a high SCR. Again, the SCR was obtained from the NCTE 
census (2005), and a SCR was available for 80 % of all schools sampled. 
21 



ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
The populations of primary and post-primary schools were sorted by these variables. For primary 
schools a systematic random sample of 260 schools was selected by starting at a random point and 
selecting every nth school. The starting point was selected by choosing a number at random from 1 
to 3,024. The n was determined by dividing the total number of schools by the total sample size, i.e. 
3,024 divided by 260. (To increase the likelihood of obtaining a minimum response rate of 40%, an 
oversample was taken to account for the fact that some schools may not have been able to 
participate.) The list was subsequently treated as circular, i.e. school 1 followed school 3,024. This 
was approximately equivalent to selecting a proportionate stratified sample in accordance with the 
variables described above. The same selection principle was applied to the population of post-
primary schools. 

2.4.2 Survey research methods 
In each of the 260 primary and 155 post-primary schools surveyed the principal received a letter of 
notification from the Inspectorate stating that their school had been chosen for participation in the 
postal survey. This letter provided schools with the background to the survey and also stated that 
survey questionnaires would follow. 

Subsequently, each school received one questionnaire for the principal and a number of 
questionnaires for the teachers. All teachers in primary schools that had eight or fewer teachers 
were asked to complete a questionnaire; primary schools with more than eight teachers were asked 
to ensure that one teacher per class group completed a questionnaire.20 For post-primary schools, all 
teachers in schools with nine or fewer teachers were asked to complete a questionnaire; those 
schools with more than nine teachers were asked to ensure that one teacher from each subject 
group completed a questionnaire.21 

These questionnaires for principals and teachers were developed by a team of inspectors, in 
collaboration with the NCTE, following a review of relevant literature and an analysis of the content 
of previous questionnaires. With the assistance of a small number of practising principals and 
teachers, all questionnaires were piloted before being tested among a larger sample of principals 
and teachers. This piloting helped to refine the questionnaires and ensured that all questions asked 
were specific and accurate. 

Two weeks after the questionnaires were sent to schools a second mailing was issued to those 
schools that, at that point, had not returned their questionnaires. This was followed by a series of 
telephone calls to schools where the response rate among the chosen variables was lower than 
average. 

20 Class groups: junior infants, senior infants, first class, second class, third class, fourth class, fifth class, and sixth class. 

21 Nine subject groups: (1) English; (2) Mathematics; (3) Irish; (4) Foreign Languages; (5) Science (Physics, Chemistry, Physics and 

Chemistry, Biology, Applied Mathematics, Science); (6) Business Studies (Accountancy, Business, Business Studies, Economics); (7) 

Applied Science (Engineering and Metalwork, Technical Drawing and Graphics, Construction Studies and Materials Technology 

(Wood), Agricultural Science, Agricultural Economics, Home Economics); (8) Social Studies I (History, Geography, Art, Craft and 

Design, Music); (9) Social Studies II (Religious Education, Physical Education, Civic, Social and Political Education (CSPE), Social, 

Personal and Health Education (SPHE)). 

22 



Evaluation methods Chapter 2 Evaluation methods Chapter 2 
2.4.3 Response rate 
Responses were received from 240 (92%) of the 260 primary schools surveyed. Completed 
questionnaires were received from 234 principals and 1,162 class teachers (an average of almost 
five teachers per school). At post-primary level, responses were received from 114 (74%) of the 155 
schools surveyed. Completed questionnaires were received from a total of 110 principals and 800 
teachers (an average of 7 teachers per school). Based on previous experience of similar surveys, the 
actual response rate in all schools was more than double what was projected. This high response 
rate reflected the degree of interest in the survey, the perceived importance of the topic, and the 
follow-up procedure adopted to ensure that replies were received. 

Fig. 2.1: Survey response rates 

Impact of ICT on teaching and learning – response rates 


100% 

80% 

60% 

40% 

20% 

0% 

92% 
74% 
Primary (n=260) Post-primary (n=155) 


23 



ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
2.4.4 Comparison of respondents and population 
The profile of the final sample of primary and post-primary schools was compared with that of the 
population. This comparison is described in tables 2.1 and 2.2. 

Table 2.1: Comparison of survey sample and population, primary schools 

Primary Schools 
Size (students) Respondents22 Population 
(n = 240) (n = 3,024) 
Small (<100) 

52% 

53% 

Medium (100–199) 

24% 

23% 

Large (200+) 

24% 

24% 

Total 

100% 

100% 

Type 

Respondents 

Population 

Single-sex 

17% 

17% 

Mixed 

83% 

83% 

Total 

100% 

100% 

Status 

Respondents 

Population 

Schools in the School Support Programme (under DEIS)23 

22% 

20% 

Schools not in the School Support Programme 

78% 

80% 

Total 

100% 

100% 

Region 

Respondents 

Population 

North and Dublin North 

23% 

24% 

South-East and Dublin South 

15% 

16% 

West and Mid-West 

27% 

26% 

South 

19% 

19% 

Midlands and Dublin West 

15% 

15% 

Total 

100% 

100% 

22 A respondent is defined as a school in respect of which a response was received either from the principal or from at least one teacher. 

23 DEIS (Delivering Equality of Opportunity in Schools), the action plan for educational disadvantage, was launched in 2005 and is being 
introduced in a phased manner over the period 2005–2010. It addresses the educational needs of children and young people from 
disadvantaged communities, from pre-school to second-level education (age 3–18). The plan provides for a standardised system for 
identifying levels of disadvantage and a new integrated School Support Programme (SSP). The SSP will bring together, and build 
upon, a number of existing interventions in schools with a concentrated level of disadvantage. More information on DEIS can be 
found at www.education.ie. 

24 



Evaluation methods Chapter 2 
Table 2.2: Comparison of survey sample and population, post-primary schools 

Post-primary schools 
Size (students) Respondents Population 
(n = 114) (n = 711) 
Small (<400) 

42% 

45% 

Medium (400–599) 

31% 

28% 

Large (>600) 

28% 

27% 

Total 

100% 

100% 

Type 

Respondents 

Population 

Single-sex 

36% 

35% 

Mixed 

64% 

65% 

Total 

100% 

100% 

Status 

Respondents 

Population 

Schools in the School Support Programme (under DEIS) 

26% 

28% 

Schools not in the School Support Programme 

74% 

72% 

Total 

100% 

100% 

Region 

Respondents 

Population 

North and Dublin North 

19% 

19% 

South-East and Dublin South 

20% 

21% 

West and Mid-West 

21% 

20% 

South 

20% 

20% 

Midlands and Dublin West 

20% 

20% 

Total 

100% 

100% 

The profile of respondents closely matched that of the population for both primary and post-primary 
schools according to the key variables of school size, type, status, and region. 

2.5 Case-study school evaluations 
A case study comprising an evaluation by inspectors of ICT provision in a sample of 32 primary 
schools and 20 post-primary schools formed part of the evaluation methods employed. These 52 
schools were selected as a subset of the main sample chosen for participation in the survey of 
primary and post-primary principals and teachers. (See section 2.4.) Because the case-study schools 
were a subset of the main survey sample and were selected randomly (as was the main sample), the 
case-study schools also reflected the known population profile according to the main stratifying 
variables. However, it should be borne in mind that the sample size was too small to be considered 
representative. 

25 



ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
Each of the fifty-two case-study schools was visited by an inspector between October 2005 and 
February 2006. The schools were notified by telephone and letter of their participation in the 
evaluation two to three weeks before the inspector’s visit. The inspectors usually spent one day in 
each school and undertook the following activities: 
• a tour of the school’s ICT facilities in the company of either the principal or the ICT co-ordinator 
• separate interviews with the principal, the ICT co-ordinator and a small group of teachers, 

normally four (the principal in each school was asked to select the group to be representative of 
the range of ICT use in the classroom and to include a teacher involved with special educational 
needs) 

• interviews with a small group of students, usually four (in primary schools the students were from 
fifth class, while in post-primary schools they were Leaving Certificate year 1 students) 
• examination of samples of students’ work in, or using, ICT; the students usually took such work 
with them to their interview with the inspector 
• a review of relevant school documents; specifically, schools were asked to supply the inspectors 
with 

— a copy of the school’s ICT plan and acceptable-use policy 
— an inventory of all ICT equipment, including ICT peripherals, in the school, indicating its 
location in the different classrooms or areas in the school 
— a copy of the duties of the ICT co-ordinator 
— a copy of the timetable for any computer room (or rooms) in the school 
• feedback to the principal. 
The inspectors used a number of instruments as part of the case-study school evaluations to gather 
evidence and data on a school’s provision of ICT. These included a “quick tour” review schedule that 
helped to gather certain factual information on the school’s ICT infrastructure. Other instruments 
used included schedules for the interviews held with the principal, the ICT co-ordinator, and the 
small groups of teachers and students. 

The inspectors also reviewed relevant background documents as part of the case-study school visits. 
Questionnaires for the principal and teachers were received from all fifty-two case-study schools, 
and these were reviewed as part of the study. Information held by the Department of Education and 
Science was also consulted (for example information on ICT grants awarded in recent years), as was 
ICT infrastructure census information (2005) held by the NCTE. 

On completion of the school visits a brief report was prepared and issued to each school. These 
reports addressed the ICT facilities that were found in the schools, as well as ICT planning and ICT in 
the classroom. As well as emphasising the strengths evident from the evaluation, each report 
included recommendations for schools to address as part of their development plans for ICT in the 
school. 

26 



Evaluation methods Chapter 2 
During the visits to schools the inspectors also administered a questionnaire to students. The 
purpose of this questionnaire was to determine the views of students on ICT, not only with regard 
to their interaction with ICT in school but also with regard to their use of ICT outside school time. 
For primary schools an entire fifth class was selected for participation, while for post-primary schools 
an entire Leaving Certificate year 1 class was selected. It was decided to select fifth-class students in 
primary schools because it was thought that this group would have enough experience of ICT in the 
school to be able to give informative feedback; this age group was also considered to be mature 
enough to respond to such formal approaches as interviews and questionnaires. At the post-primary 
level, Leaving Certificate year 1 students were selected because at that point in their schooling they 
would have had three or four years’ experience of ICT in their school and so were considered to be 
in a position to give informed responses to questions. A total of 437 primary students and 450 post-
primary students completed questionnaires. Reference is made to the findings of this survey of 
students throughout this report. 

2.6 Observations during classroom inspections 
(primary) and subject inspections (post-
primary) 
During the period in which case-study schools were being visited by inspectors (October 2005 to 
February 2006), the majority of the inspectors who were engaged in evaluative work in mainstream 
primary and post-primary schools completed an “ICT review schedule” for each school they 
visited.24 These schools were not a subset of the schools that participated in the survey of primary 
and post-primary principals and teachers but were simply those selected for evaluation as part of the 
continuing work of the Inspectorate in the period in question. The ICT review schedules used by the 
inspectors were a means of gathering first-hand information on the use of ICT in those schools, 
particularly with regard to teaching and learning in the classroom. 

2.6.1 Primary schools 
The ICT review schedule used by inspectors at primary level contained three sections. The first two 
sections were identical and were to be completed in respect of two individual mainstream class 
teachers. The third section was to be completed in relation to the work of a member of the special-
education team in a school (for example the resource teacher, the learning-support teacher or the 
resource teacher for Travellers). The first part of each of the three sections in the schedule required 
inspectors to ask questions of the individual teacher relating to their ICT planning and their use of 
ICT. The second part of each section asked inspectors to observe and evaluate the level of 
integration of ICT in teaching and learning during the inspection period with that teacher. 

24 In the course of their work, inspectors undertake WSEs in both primary and post-primary schools. These evaluations are usually 
conducted by inspectors working in teams. In addition—and although subject inspections form part of the WSE process in a post-
primary school—inspectors also undertake separate subject inspections in post-primary schools. 

27 



ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
In all, inspectors visited 77 primary schools during the period in question and completed ICT review 
schedules in respect of 127 mainstream class teachers. As each schedule was completed during a 
specific lesson, the inspectors observed 127 lessons. Most of these lessons took place in classrooms 
with more than one class group (for example, one lesson in a small rural school might have had first, 
second and third-class students in the same classroom). The classes involved, however, ranged from 
infants to sixth class. Fig. 2.2 provides details of the lessons observed. 

Fig. 2.2: Mainstream lesson observations in primary schools 

Class level(s) being taught 

(Multiple response) 

40% 
30% 
20% 
10% 
0% 
20% 19% 
23% 
17% 
26% 
23% 
30% 31% 
Infants Senior First Second Third Fourth Fifth Sixth 
Infants Class Class Class Class Class Class 

Base: All mainstream class observations (n=127) 

Inspectors completed ICT review schedules in respect of 71 special-education team members 
(resource teacher, learning-support teacher or resource teacher for Travellers), and therefore 71 
lessons conducted by a member of a special-education team were observed. 

2.6.2 Post-primary schools 
The ICT review schedule used by inspectors at post-primary level was subject-focused and contained 
two sections. The first section comprised a short subject questionnaire that required the inspector to 
ask questions of the principal and the teacher (or teachers) of the particular subject (or subjects) 
being evaluated. These questions related to the use of ICT in the subject (or subjects), ICT in subject 
planning, and the preparation and implementation of ICT in the assessment of students’ 
achievement. The second section of the review schedule comprised two lesson observation forms 
and asked inspectors to record the level of integration of ICT in teaching and learning in the subject 
area being evaluated. Inspectors generally completed one of these forms for a junior-cycle lesson 
and one for a senior-cycle lesson. 

28 



Evaluation methods Chapter 2 
In total, 111 post-primary schools were visited by inspectors during the period in question. This 
comprised both those schools that participated in WSE and those that participated in a separate 
subject inspection. This process yielded a total of 168 completed ICT review schedules. In essence, 
this meant that 168 subject questionnaires were completed jointly by teachers and principals. The 
subjects reviewed are illustrated in fig. 2.3.25 

Fig. 2.3: Subjects reviewed at post-primary level 

20% 
15% 
10% 
5% 
0% 
17% 17% 
16% 
13% 
11% 
7% 
5% 
4% 
2% 
8% 
Science Social Applied Foreign English Maths Business Irish Social Other 
Studies I Science Languages Studies Studies II 

Base: All post-primary subject questionnaires (n=168) 

Arising from the 111 post-primary school visits inspectors completed ICT review schedules in respect 
of a total of 311 lessons. Table 2.3 gives details of the level of those lessons observed. 

Table 2.3: Number and level of lessons observed, post-primary schools 

Level Number of lessons observed Percentage 
Junior Certificate 

154 

49.5% 
Transition Year 

38 

12.2% 
Leaving Certificate 

119 

38.3% 

Total 

311 

100% 

25 In this regard only subjects in which inspections took place are included in the relevant subject groups, as follows: Science (29 subject 
questionnaires completed for Science, Physics, Chemistry, and Biology); Social Studies I (28 subject questionnaires completed for 
History, Geography, and Music); Applied Science (27 subject questionnaires completed for Engineering and Metalwork, Technical 
Drawing and Graphics, Construction Studies and Materials Technology (Wood), and Home Economics); Foreign Languages (22 
subject questionnaires completed for French, German, and Classical Studies); English (18 subject questionnaires completed for 
English); Mathematics (11 subject questionnaires completed for Mathematics); Business Studies (9 subject questionnaires completed 
for Accountancy, Business, and Business Studies); Irish (7 subject questionnaires completed for Irish); Social Studies II (4 subject 
questionnaires completed for Physical Education); other (13 subject questionnaires completed for Guidance (8), Transition Year 
modules (3), and computers (2)). 

29 



ICT in Schools • Part 1 Introduction 
2.7 On-line evaluation 
Twenty post-primary schools, as described in section 2.5, participated in the case studies. In these 
schools inspectors interviewed a total of 79 teachers. Each of these teachers was subsequently 
invited to take part in a follow-up on-line survey, which was designed to build a profile of the 
teachers involved and to obtain further insights into their views on a number of specific issues raised 
in the interviews. The teachers were asked to complete an on-line questionnaire based primarily on 
responses obtained in the interviews. A total of 37 teachers completed the questionnaire—a 
response rate of 47%. The profile of these teachers was compared with that of the random sample 
of 800 teachers who completed the postal questionnaire. The profiles of the two groups were 
found to match quite closely on a number of significant variables, namely gender, age, and 
computer ownership. 

2.8 Evaluation outputs and terms 
2.8.1 Outputs 
All data gathered as a result of the evaluation was analysed using relevant statistical analysis 
software. Each table and chart in this report presents results using percentages and counts. All 
percentages are based on valid counts (that is, where questions were answered by respondents, 
unless otherwise stated). Some rounding of percentages has occurred. The order of outputs in each 
section generally follows the order of questions in the relevant questionnaires. 

2.8.2 Junior and senior classes 
At primary level the use of the term “junior class” refers collectively to junior infants, senior infants, 
first class, and second class; “senior class” refers collectively to third class, fourth class, fifth class, 
and sixth class. At post-primary level the term “junior cycle” refers collectively to first year, second 
year, and third year; “senior cycle” refers to Transition Year, fifth year, and sixth year. 

2.8.3 Quantitative terms used in this report 
A number of quantitative terms are used throughout the report. Table 2.4 provides a guide to the 
most frequently used terms. 

Table 2.4: Quantitative terms used in the report 

Quantitative term Approximate percentage of occurrence 
Almost all 

More than 90% 

Most 

75–90% 

Majority 

50–74% 

Less than half 

25–49% 

A small number 

16–24% 

A few 

Up to 15% 

30 



ICT infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools 
Chapter 3 
31Part 2 
ICT infrastructure 
and planning in 
schools 
ICT infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools 
Chapter 3 
31Part 2 
ICT infrastructure 
and planning in 
schools 

ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
3.1 Introduction 
The effectiveness of ICT in any school is very much dependent on the quality of the infrastructure 
present. This chapter examines some ICT infrastructural issues in schools. It begins by taking a step 
back from the school itself to look at the ICT advisory service and in particular the degree to which 
schools engage with the service. ICT funding issues are also considered, as schools frequently raised 
the issue of funding during the course of the evaluation. Issues of ICT maintenance, technical 
support and obsolescence are also examined, as well as the levels of access by teachers and 
students to computer and e-mail facilities in schools. 

The number and location of computers in schools is also examined, and the issues that can arise as 
a result are addressed. In this regard reference is made to ICT facilities in areas for use by teachers 
and students as well as ICT in special-education and school administration settings. With regard to 
the post-primary level, specific reference is made to the dedicated computer room and to ICT in 
specialist and general classrooms. Finally, the chapter looks at the availability of ICT peripherals in 
schools, and it concludes by offering some comments on school web sites. 

32 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
3.2 The ICT advisory service 
The ICT advisory service is funded by the NCTE but is managed and implemented by the twenty-one 
full-time education centres around the country. Its objective is to support the implementation of the 
ICT in Schools Initiative (see chapter 1) at the local level and to help build a knowledge base on 
good practice in relation to ICT in schools. 

One element of the advisory service is the provision of one full-time ICT advisor, as well as one ICT 
administrative assistant, in each education centre. The ICT advisors’ role is primarily concerned with 
providing pedagogical advice and support to schools and also (though to a lesser extent) technical 
advice and support. The activities of ICT advisors are monitored by the NCTE. In the national survey 
of teachers a number of questions were asked to elicit views on the level and quality of interaction 
between schools and the advisory service. In addition, the inspectors asked principals, ICT coordinators 
and teachers during all fifty-two case-study school evaluations about the nature of their 
school’s interaction with the advisory service. 

In their questionnaire, teachers were asked if they were aware of the ICT advisory service in their 
local education centre and whether they had availed of it. Fewer than half (48%) of the 1,162 
primary teachers reported that they were aware of the service. Awareness among post-primary 
teachers was even lower, with only 37% of the 800 respondents reporting that they were aware of 
the service. 

The survey found considerable disparity in the awareness levels of teachers (both primary and post-
primary) in different parts of the country. Furthermore, at post-primary level it was found that 
awareness of the service also varied considerably between teachers of different subject areas, with 
the lowest level of awareness recorded among teachers of applied science subjects. 

The survey revealed that 63% of respondent primary teachers were aware that the advisory service 
offered fully funded ICT courses through local education centres. This figure fell to slightly more 
than half (52%) of all respondents at post-primary level. At this level teachers of social studies I 
subjects (History, Geography, Art, Craft and Design and Music) were most aware that such courses 
were offered, with 57% of these teachers reporting this awareness. This group was followed by 
teachers of Mathematics (56%), English (55%), and languages (54%). Teachers of Irish (42%) and 
the applied science subjects (37%) were least aware that the service offered these courses. 

In general, these figures show a substantial variation in levels of awareness among teachers and 
suggest that there is considerable scope for the service to promote itself more vigorously among 
schools. In looking at ways to promote an increased level of awareness of the support it offers, the 
service should consider strategies that are applicable equally to primary and post-primary schools 
and in all regions. At post-primary level, strategies should be inclusive of all teachers, that is, 
irrespective of subject expertise. 

33 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
Of the 48% of primary teachers who reported awareness of the ICT advisory service, some 46% 
(22% of all primary respondents) reported having ever used it. At post-primary level, of the 37% of 
teachers who reported awareness of the service only 41% (15% of all respondents at this level) had 
ever used it. This relatively low level of use among those teachers who were aware of the service 
may be ascribed to a number of factors: 
• insufficient knowledge on the part of teachers of the exact nature of the services offered 
• the relatively small number of ICT advisors, making it difficult for teachers to obtain access to the 

service 
• the distance of some teachers or schools from their nearest education centre 
• lack of time on the part of teachers to engage with the service. 

The survey also asked those teachers who had engaged with the advisory service to rate the service 
they received. It was found, as shown in fig. 3.1, that “information on, and availability of, ICT 
courses” achieved high satisfaction ratings, with 92% of primary and 84% of post-primary teachers 
stating that the quality of the service received was either “good” or “very good.” The quality of the 
“technical advice provided by the ICT advisor” also achieved relatively high satisfaction ratings, with 
76% and 75% of primary and post-primary teachers, respectively, reporting this aspect of the 
service to be “good” or “very good.” The “advice offered by the ICT advisor on classroom use of 
ICT” also achieved respectable ratings, with 68% and 69% of primary and post-primary teachers, 
respectively, rating this aspect as either “good” or “very good.” 

Fig. 3.1: Teachers’ ratings of NCTE and ICT advisory services 

How do you rate the NCTE service which you have availed of? 
[% Good 
or Very Good] 

100% 
80% 
60% 
40% 
20% 
0% 
Information on, and 
92% 
84% 
Technical advice 
76% 75% 
Advice on classroom 
68% 69% 
School visit by ICT 
58% 58% 
availability of, ICT courses provided by ICT Advisor use of ICT provided by ICT Advisor 
Advisor


Primary 
Post-Primary 

Base: All primary teachers who availed of NCTE/local advisory service (n=239) 
All post-primary teachers who availed of NCTE/local advisory service (n=114) 

34 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
“School visits by the ICT advisor” received lower satisfaction ratings. Some 58% of both the 239 
primary and 114 post-primary teachers who reported having availed of this service provided a 
“good” or “very good” rating. The corollary is that 42% of both primary and post-primary teachers 
who had received a school visit felt that the service received was either “fair” or “poor.” This finding 
suggests that the nature of the work undertaken by ICT advisors during school visits should be 
reviewed, perhaps in collaboration with schools themselves, to ensure that the maximum benefit to 
the school and teachers results from each visit undertaken. 

At post-primary level, teachers of the applied science subjects and the social studies II group of 
subjects (Religious Education, Physical Education, CSPE, and SPHE) tended to provide more positive 
ratings for services availed of than teachers of other subjects. Teachers of Business Studies provided 
the lowest ratings, in particular for technical advice, advice on classroom use of ICT, and the school 
visit by the ICT advisor. Given this finding, it would be important for the NCTE and the ICT advisory 
service to ensure that its services at post-primary level take account of the needs of different subject 
teachers. 

The generally low level of awareness of the work of the advisory service was confirmed by the 
findings from the case-study school evaluations. It was common for inspectors to recommend in 
reports that the advisory service be made use of as fully as possible. The majority of the nineteen 
case-study primary school evaluation reports that made reference to the ICT advisory service, for 
example, encouraged schools to liaise more with the service, and other relevant services, particularly 
with regard to advice on ICT planning and staff training issues. One of these reports recommended 
that 

support should be sought from relevant bodies—the local education centre, NCTE and the cuiditheoirí 
attached to the primary curriculum support service (PCSP) and school development planning (SDP) to 
assist the school (i) to provide staff up-skilling in ICT, (ii) to develop a policy on ICT and (iii) to explore ways 
in which ICT may be integrated in teaching and learning in the school. 

Almost half the twenty evaluations conducted at post-primary level made reference to the advisory 
service, and of those that did, approximately half again commented on the relatively low level of 
interaction that existed between the school and the service. One inspector commented: 

There is a relatively low level of interaction with the ICT advisory service available in the local education 
centre. This is surprising given the proximity of the school to the education centre. It is recommended that 
this service be used more extensively. 

In one primary-school report it was also mentioned that the “absence of an ICT advisor in the local 
education centre to support the school and promote ICT projects” was seen as a factor that 
constrained the development of ICT in the school. This also affected local post-primary schools in a 
similar fashion. 

35 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
Notwithstanding the generally low level of engagement by teachers with the advisory service, there 
were examples of satisfaction with the service in some case-study schools. One primary school 
report mentioned that the school had 

engaged the ICT advisor to assist in the use of the data projector in the school. The school has also 
engaged in a project through [the local institute of technology] with the assistance of the ICT advisor. 

One post-primary school was reported as having a “high level of support from the local ICT advisor 
in terms of advice and information, particularly in relation to training courses for teachers.” In 
another post-primary school the reason given for the low level of interaction with the advisory 
service was that ICT provision in the school had progressed to the point where it was felt that the 
support of the service was no longer required. 

An analysis of the surveys of teachers showed that awareness of the advisory service was 
considerably higher among ICT co-ordinators than other teachers, and that ICT co-ordinators also 
tended to avail more often of the service. Table 3.1 shows the differences in the level of use of the 
NCTE and ICT advisory service services between ICT co-ordinating teachers and other teachers in 
both primary and post-primary schools. 

Table 3.1: Awareness and use of NCTE and ICT advisory services among teachers 

Primary schools Post-primary schools 
Teachers who 

Teachers who 

All 

Teachers who 

Teachers who 

All 
were ICT 

were not ICT 

respondent 

were ICT 

were not ICT 

respondent 
co-ordinators 

co-ordinators 

teachers 

co-ordinators 

co-ordinators 

teachers 
Aware of ICT 
advisory service 

81% 

45% 

48% 

84% 

31% 

37% 
Availed of ICT 
advisory service 

63% 

18% 

22% 

61% 

11% 

15% 
Accessed NCTE 
web site in previous 
three years 

69% 

29% 

33% 

82% 

19% 

24% 
Number of teachers26 

115 

938 

1,162 

46 

524 

800 

The high levels of awareness and strong pattern of liaison with the NCTE and the ICT advisory 
service among ICT co-ordinators reflects the nature of the work of co-ordinators in schools. This 
level of communication could be considered an indicator of good practice, and co-ordinators 
should, where relevant, encourage classroom and subject teachers in their schools to engage with 
the NCTE and other relevant services. 

26 A number of teachers did not state whether or not they were ICT co-ordinators in their school. 

36 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
3.3 ICT and funding 
National investment issues pertaining to ICT in education over recent years are described in chapter 1. 
An examination of ICT funding issues in individual schools was not a priority of this evaluation: the 
priorities were more concerned with pedagogical issues. However, schools repeatedly raised the 
issue of funding during the evaluation, particularly in the case-study school evaluations. 

It was clear from the case-study school evaluations that ICT grants received by schools through 
relevant DES schemes had encouraged schools to install or upgrade their ICT systems.27 In particular, 
grants had led to improvements in the quality of facilities available in computer rooms, to an 
expansion in the range of ICT peripherals available, and to the further integration of ICT in teaching 
and learning. School principals repeatedly acknowledged that these grants had facilitated the 
development of their ICT systems, and in a small number of evaluation reports specific mention was 
made of how the grants had been used in developing the school’s ICT infrastructure. Where such 
reference was made inspectors generally noted that effective use had been made of the funds 
received. One evaluation report commented that “it was clear that these grants have been used 
effectively to develop the ICT system in the school.” It was also obvious from evaluation reports, 
however, that not all schools had reached the same level of development. 

A significant number of primary school evaluation reports mentioned that progress had not been 
made towards using the grant made available for networking. In a few reports reasons for such 
delays were cited, such as the school having been approved for a significant building project, while 
in the remainder no reasons for lack of progress were offered. 

While acknowledging the benefits of the grants received, schools generally reported spending more 
on ICT than they received in grants. Evaluation reports regularly referred to how schools had 
augmented the financial support received through the NCTE with private funds; a little less than half 
of the thirty-two primary school evaluation reports, for example, stated that financial assistance for 
the development of their ICT systems was also received from other sources. This issue (referred to 
also in chapter 1) was particularly emphasised in case-study schools during interviews with principals 
and ICT co-ordinators. One post-primary school report commented: 

The school is at an advanced stage in the development of ICT for teaching and learning. The facilities are 
of a high standard and improving. The school’s access to private funds plays a large role in the 
achievements to date, and into the future. 

The most frequently reported source of private funds in both primary and post-primary schools was 
fund-raising by parents’ councils or parents’ groups. Additionally, at primary level it was also 
common for students to become involved in fund-raising activities. Primary schools also reported 
receiving contributions of second-hand ICT equipment from businesses and third-level institutions 
and of equipment received as prizes in competitions. This additional expenditure on ICT displays a 

27 See chapter 1 for details of ICT grant schemes for schools to date, for example, Schools IT 2000 (1998), Blueprint for the Future of ICT 
in Irish Schools (2001), and Networking Schools (2004). These grants were primarily for the purchase of computers and software for the 
development of networking, together with the installation of broadband connectivity. 

37 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
particular commitment by schools to providing students with access to ICT. There is the danger that 
in relying on private funding sources certain schools may be at a disadvantage. Some students, for 
example, are likely to be placed at a disadvantage relative to others if their school community does 
not provide additional funding for its school to purchase computers. The spending of private funds 
by schools on computers could actually be contributing to an exacerbation of the digital divide in 
society. Clearly, the widespread use of private funding suggests that the demand for ICT equipment 
exceeds what can be met from the public grants provided to date. 

3.4 ICT maintenance, technical support, and 
obsolescence 
The problems associated with the lack of technical support and maintenance were commented 
upon strongly in the national survey responses from principals and teachers. These respondents’ 
comments provided an insight into the complexities faced by some schools regarding this issue. One 
principal of a small primary school stated that “the biggest problem encountered is lack of technical 
support. We have to take equipment to the nearest IT company for repair.” Another primary school 
principal mentioned that it was “difficult to access maintenance in an isolated rural area, and it’s 
hugely expensive. The DES should provide back-up in each county that we can use.” One primary 
teacher wrote that, while “all multimedia equipment, laptops and the interactive whiteboard have 
been supplied by the Digital Hub, there should be financial support for its maintenance.”28 This 
comment neatly summarises the fact that for this school the issue was not one of a lack of resources 
but the lack of an efficient way of maintaining them. At post-primary level, one principal of a small 
co-educational vocational school (0–399 students) wrote: 

All of the IT equipment in the school is old (pre-1999) and is constantly giving trouble. We have no 
technical expertise amongst the staff so maintenance is a problem. Teachers are discouraged and 
frustrated and the use of ICT becomes a negative experience for both student and teacher. 

All case-study schools consistently reported that the maintenance, upgrading and technical support 
of their ICT equipment was a cause of great strain, and that these were areas that consumed 
significant amounts of their budget. A little less than half of the thirty-two primary schools 
evaluated had made provision for technical support and maintenance of their hardware, while 
slightly less than half of the twenty post-primary schools visited had a maintenance contract with an 
external contractor. Arrangements at primary level included responsibility for maintaining the ICT 
system resting with the principal, with another member of the staff, or with a member of the board 
of management, or subcontracting maintenance support. Reasons offered by those primary schools 
that had no ICT maintenance scheme included: the cost; the fact that the ICT infrastructure was so 
small that its size did not warrant a formal maintenance scheme; and the fact that no member of 
the staff had the relevant skills or expertise. 

28 The Digital Hub is a Government initiative to create an international centre of excellence for knowledge, innovation and creativity 
concentrated on digital content and technology enterprises. The core development of nine acres is in the Liberties area of Dublin. 
Over the next decade this initiative hopes to create a mixed-use development consisting of enterprise, residential, retail, learning and 
civic space. The project is managed by a Government agency, the Digital Hub Development Agency, established in July 2003. 

38 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
The maintenance contract at post-primary level generally entailed an IT consultant or technician 
devoting one or two days per month to maintaining the school’s ICT system. It was usually the ICT 
co-ordinator in these schools who was responsible for liaising with the contractor. While not ideal, 
primarily because of the lack of a same-day call-out service, such contracts did seem to assist these 
schools in keeping their ICT system intact. In schools that had no contract it was usually the ICT coordinator 
who had responsibility for some, if not all, of the maintenance of the ICT infrastructure. 

Schools with no hardware maintenance system stated that this acted as a significant impediment to 
the development of ICT in their school. Inspectors recommended in these schools that, wherever 
feasible, an ICT maintenance policy be adopted. 

The issue of obsolescence was also found to be a significant problem that schools were required to 
deal with regularly. One post-primary evaluation report stated: 

There is a lot of obsolete or near-obsolete equipment in the school. The laptops seem to be problematic. 
ICT equipment in the year head and deputy principal’s offices are old and largely unused. 

Obsolescence appeared to be a bigger problem at primary than at post-primary level. Inspectors 
made reference to the age of computers in slightly less than half of the thirty-two primary case-
study school reports, compared with only a few post-primary reports. In some primary schools it was 
reported that “most of the desktop computers were dated” or that “some hardware was no longer 
working.” One report mentioned that the “computers in the senior classroom did not appear to be 

39 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
functioning at the time of evaluation,” while in another it was stated that, despite “the considerable 
investment to date, most of the hardware in the school is quite old.” A few reports drew attention 
to the fact that “some software was incompatible with certain computers” because the hardware 
was so old. 

Taken together, these reports paint a picture of schools having computers that, for all practical 
purposes, are obsolete and should be disposed of. These findings are supported by the results of the 
NCTE census (2005), which found that “29% of computers in primary schools, 19% in post-primary 
and 21% in special schools are over 6 years old.” In reports that referred to obsolescence it was 
sometimes stated that this problem could be reduced if computers were used for tasks compatible 
with their specification. In cases, however, where the technical specification of computers rendered 
them unusable, their disposal (in line with proper practice) was usually recommended. The ageing 
profile of hardware, the lack of compatibility between hardware and software and the development 
of network systems bring the issue of technical support and maintenance even more to the fore. 

In general, schools do not have the expertise within their own staffing to maintain their ICT systems. 
Where schools have established maintenance contracts with IT companies, on the other hand, this is 
having a negative impact on their budget and in particular on the level of spending they can afford 
to devote to computer equipment. One principal of a medium-sized (400–599 students) voluntary 
secondary single-sex school responded in the questionnaire: 

The major problem that occurs in the IT area is the need for ongoing technical assistance. One teacher 
(part-time staff member) has an allocation of two hours/week but this is only able to service the basic 
needs of the staff using the rooms and facilities. The school has an IT service provider but this is costly and 
while good service is given it would be so much more efficient to have a technician on site or at least 
shared between two schools. The area of technical support must be assessed and supported if we are to 
progress with increasing use of ICT across the curriculum. 

An appropriate increase in the DES student capitation grant paid to schools or direct grants could be 
used as a means of furnishing schools with an annual ICT upgrading fund. It would be important to 
make sure that such a budget was reserved for this specific use. The purpose of this budget should 
be to deal with ICT obsolescence so as to ensure that the ICT infrastructure is not allowed to 
become outdated. Advice regarding the spending of this annual budget could be sought from the 
NCTE or other relevant agencies. 

It is clear also that the issue of maintenance in schools needs to be addressed in a co-ordinated 
fashion at system level so that all schools can benefit from having a secure and reliable infrastructure 
that will support the integration of ICT throughout the school. A strategy is required to ensure that 
a comprehensive ICT maintenance and support service is available to schools. A range of models 
whereby this service could be delivered needs to be explored. These models could include clustering 
schools for the purpose of taking out maintenance contracts with commercial IT companies, 
national or regional contracts for technical support for schools, or other options. The effectiveness 

40 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
of these models could be explored on a pilot basis initially, so as to identify the most cost-effective 
and efficient way in which the necessary support could be provided to schools. These solutions 
would also require a review of the role and purpose of the local ICT advisory service. 

3.5 Access to computers 
In general, the surveys of teachers found that schools provided both teachers and students with 
high levels of access to computer facilities. 

3.5.1 Access by teachers 
Access by teachers at the primary level, as depicted in fig. 3.2, was primarily provided in the 
teachers’ own classrooms, with 86% of teachers surveyed reporting this to be the case. A similar 
level reported having access to their own computer at home. A little less than a third (29%) of 
teachers, however, reported that access was provided in the staff room. This low figure in respect of 
staff rooms is undoubtedly influenced by the fact that many small primary schools do not have such 
a room. 

Fig. 3.2: Access to computers by primary teachers 

100% 

80% 

60% 

40% 

20% 

0% 

Staff room 
29% 
Classroom Home 
86% 86% 
Base: All primary teachers (n=1162) 

A little less than a quarter of primary schools (24%) were found to provide their teachers with 
computer facilities for use at home (for example a laptop computer). Support of this type was found 
to be slightly higher for teachers of senior classes (29% of senior class teachers) compared with 
teachers of junior classes (21%). Primary teachers also reported that only 10% of classes had access 
to their school’s computers outside class contact hours. 

41 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
Access to computer facilities for teachers at post-primary level, as shown in fig. 3.3, was primarily 
through the staff room (85% of teachers), but a significant proportion (34%) stated that they had 
access in their classroom. When the findings were analysed by subject it was found that access in 
classrooms was highest for teachers of the science subjects (66%), the applied science subjects 
(43%), and Mathematics (41%). Teachers of English (21%), of foreign languages (17%) and of Irish 
(14%) were least likely to have access in their classroom. It would appear that many schools have 
opted to give priority to supplying their specialist classrooms with computer equipment, in 
preference to general classrooms, though the nature of the subjects and the expertise of the 
teachers may also be explanatory factors. 

Fig. 3.3: Access to computers by post-primary teachers 

100% 

80% 

60% 

40% 

20% 

0% 

Base: All post-primary teachers (n=800) 

The survey also found that schools with a low SCR were more likely to provide their teachers with 
access to a computer in their classroom (41%) than schools with a high SCR (30%). It is likely that 
schools with a high SCR concentrate their ICT equipment in one or more areas in the school (for 
example the computer room), as opposed to spreading it thinly throughout the school (for example 
one or two computers in general classrooms). It is also worth noting that 90% of post-primary 
teachers reported using their own home computer for school activities. Support from their schools, 
however, was low, with only 18% of teachers provided with computer facilities by their school (for 
example a laptop for use at home). 

3.5.2 Access by students 
Fifth-year and fifth-class students in all fifty-two case-study schools that participated in the 
evaluation (32 primary, 20 post-primary) were also asked about where they had access to a 
computer. All 437 respondents at primary level, as shown in fig. 3.4, reported having access to 

85% 
Classroom 
34% 
90% 
Home
Staff room 

42 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
computers at school, but access at home was less, at 86%. Access was also reported from other 
places, such as a library or a friend’s or relative’s house. 

Fig. 3.4: Access to computers by fifth-class students 

100% 

80% 

60% 

40% 

20% 

0% 

At home 
86% 
At school At other place(s) 
100% 
78% 
Base: All primary students (n=437) 

More than three-quarters (79%) of the students surveyed at primary level reported that they had 
been using computers for three or more years. Their present usage was reported as being frequent: 
79% reported using a computer at least two or three times a week at home, while 88% reported 
using a computer at least two or three times a week at school. Students reported that computers 
were usually in their classrooms, and that they generally used them individually or in pairs. 

More than four out of five primary students (82%) stated that using a computer helped them with 
their school work. This was mainly through use of the internet for projects. Only 39% reported 
using their home computer to help them with their homework. 

A very high proportion (97%) of the 450 respondent fifth-year students, as shown in fig. 3.5, stated 
that they had access to a computer at school. A high proportion (89%) also stated that they had 
access to a computer at home. Outside of school and home there was also access in other places, 
such as a local library, an internet café, or a friend’s house. 

43 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
Fig. 3.5: Access to computers by fifth-year students 

100% 

80% 

60% 

40% 

20% 

0% 

At school At other place(s)

At home 
89% 
97% 
78% 
Base: All post-primary students (n=450) 

While it can be said that fifth-year students generally have high levels of access to computers in 
school, the survey also found that approximately 50% used a computer in school at least once a 
week. This was slightly lower than computer use at home, where 62% of students reported using a 
computer at least once a week. Interestingly, the survey also found that students in schools with a 
high SCR reported using a computer just as often as students in those schools with a low SCR. 
While this may reflect the fact that computers in post-primary schools are concentrated in computer 
rooms, it would also suggest that although one school may have more computers than another it 
does not directly follow that the former put its extra computers to more productive use. Computers 
in post-primary schools, especially those for the use of students, tend to be located mainly in 
computer rooms. Students’ use of computers, therefore, is more a function of access to a computer 
room than of access to computers per se. In planning the development of their ICT infrastructure, 
post-primary schools need to give due consideration to maximising students’ access to, and use of, 
the facilities. 

44 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
3.6 The use of computers in schools 
The survey of principals revealed that 38% of primary schools had at least one computer room and 
that 62% of schools provided ICT facilities in classrooms only. It also revealed that 10% provided 
such facilities in computer rooms only, while 28% provided these facilities in both classrooms and 
computer rooms. At post-primary level, practically all schools have at least one computer room, and 
traditionally computers in these schools are confined primarily to those rooms. The evaluation 
found, however, that post-primary schools are increasingly moving towards providing other areas 
with computer facilities. 

Inspectors noted the number of usable computers in each of the case-study schools visited. At 
primary level this ranged from four computers in one two-teacher school to forty-eight in a 23teacher 
school. The SCR for the thirty-two schools visited varied significantly, from an optimum of 

2:1 in a small two-teacher school to 16:1 in a five-teacher school. The majority of reports recorded a 
SCR of between 8:1 and 12:1, with the national average for primary schools in 2005 standing at 
9.1:1.29 
The number of usable computers in the twenty post-primary schools visited ranged from 124 in one 
school with an enrolment of 699 students to twenty in a school with an enrolment of 289. The SCR 
varied significantly among these twenty schools, from an optimum of 3.7:1 in a small community 
school (fewer than 399 students) to 14.4:1 in a small secondary school. The majority of reports 
recorded a SCR of between 5.2:1 and 8.4:1, with the national average for post-primary schools in 
2005 standing at 7:1. 

In planning for the use of ICT in schools, the location of computers is important.30 Sections 3.6.1 
and 3.6.2 of this report provide an overview of the organisation of ICT facilities in the case-study 
schools visited, as well as an overview of the issues that arise as a result. They draw predominantly 
on information obtained from the case-study schools evaluated but also on the responses to the 
national surveys of principals. 

3.6.1 Organisation of ICT facilities in case-study primary schools 
ICT facilities were found in computer rooms, classrooms, staff rooms, administrative areas, school 
libraries and general-purpose rooms in the case-study primary schools evaluated. The level of 
permeation of ICT in classrooms was described by inspectors as being “in all classrooms” in twenty-
two of the thirty-two schools visited, in the “majority of classrooms” in five schools, in “some 
classrooms” in one school, and “non-existent” in the classrooms of four schools. 

29 See NCTE 2005 Census on ICT Infrastructure in Schools: Statistical Report (July 2006), page 3, table 4. The SCR in primary schools for 

2000 was 16.3:1, while in 2002 it stood at 11.2:1. As can be seen, there has been an improvement on the SCR in schools between 2000 

and 2005. 

30 The installation of computers in new schools is governed by the department’s technical guidance documents. These are Information 

and Communications Technology (ICT) Infrastructure Guidelines for Primary Schools (TGD 004), February 2004, and Information and 

Communications Technology (ICT) Infrastructure Guidelines for Post-primary Schools (TGD 005), February 2004. Both documents can 

be found at www.education.ie. 

45 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
ICT facilities in areas for students’ use 

Eleven of the thirty-two case-study primary schools had one dedicated computer room each. 
Enrolment in these schools varied between 121 and 624 students. Of the twenty-one schools that 
did not have a computer room, enrolment varied from 14 to 209 students. Computer rooms, 
therefore, tended to be found in the larger of the primary schools visited. 

The number of computers found in computer rooms varied from a minimum of ten to a maximum 
of twenty-one networked computers. A few small schools had placed all their computers in a 
dedicated area, which they referred to as the “computer room.” In these cases the number of 
computers was generally six or less, and usually they were not networked. The reasons for such 
consolidation of facilities usually concerned lack of space, with one report stating that the “school 
originally located the computers in the two classrooms, but because of limited space it was decided 
to relocate them to the staff room.” Because of the lack of a suitable area for use as a computer 
room, one school placed eight networked computers in a mainstream classroom; an ICT specialist 
teacher directed lessons on these computers while the class teacher taught as normal in the room. 
In another situation the computer room was used for a range of purposes: 

While the timetable facilitates use of the computer room by teachers, there are a number of constraints 
that adversely affect its use. Among these is the multi-purpose use of the room to accommodate the 
school secretary, learning-support teaching, resource teaching and the principal’s administration duties. 

A few schools with a computer room had timetables that generally governed when class groups got 
to use the room. However, this also governed when other groups did not get to use the room. One 
report, for example, stated that “a timetable is provided which allows all mainstream classes, apart 
from infants, at least weekly access to the computer room.” In another school it was reported that 

students in middle and senior classes leave their classroom in groups to use the computers from time to 
time. Students in first and second class occasionally use the computers in the afternoon, when the infant 
students have gone home. 

In another report there was clear evidence of restricted use of the computer room: 

The computers in the computer room are used by the senior classes only and appear to be in regular use. 
The other mainstream teachers or students do not generally use the computer room. As there are no 
computers in either the junior or middle classroom, this means that students do not begin consistent 
computer use until third class. 

With regard to three schools inspectors recommended that the timetable for the computer room be 
reviewed with a view to providing more students with access. Schools were encouraged to develop 
a booking system (for example a notice or rota on the notice-board in the staff room) for the use of 
the computer room whereby teachers could book the room to take class groups at particular times. 
In their national survey, 51% of principals felt that the main advantage of having a computer room 

46 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
was that it allowed concurrent access to the computers for whole classes. Interestingly, 32% of 
principals also felt that it was a more conducive environment for learning ICT than the classroom. 

Most case-study primary schools had some level of ICT facilities in each of their classrooms. One 
report pertaining to a five-teacher school, for example, stated that “there are seven computers 
shared between mainstream classrooms,” while the report on a thirteen-teacher school noted that 
there were “over twenty computers in good repair, but of varying age, located in mainstream 
classrooms.” 

In general, the distribution of computers in classrooms varied significantly from school to school. 
There was no clear pattern as to how schools decided to distribute their computers, as some 
classrooms had generous levels while others had limited supplies. In schools where computers were 
located in classrooms only, however, reports did reveal that access to, and use of, the technology 
was more relaxed and more frequent. One report stated: 

Teachers reported that all students had access to, and made use of, computers. This was assisted by the 
fact that computers are located in each of the classrooms in the school. All students have access to the 
computer on a weekly basis . . . a computer rota system is used in classrooms to ensure that all students 
access the computer. Files of individual students’ work are maintained on the hard disk of the classroom 
computers. 

In their survey, principals reported that, from a teaching and learning viewpoint, the advantages of 
having computers in classrooms were threefold: 
• there is convenient and flexible access 
• it is easier to supervise, control and assist students 
• individual attention can be managed more easily, especially for special-needs students. 

Computers in classrooms, however, were not always organised optimally. One case-study school 
report commented: 

The organisation of the school’s ICT infrastructure, particularly within individual classrooms, should be 
reviewed to accommodate further development of students’ writing skills through the writing process, 
the development of collaborative skills through project work and the development of research skills 
through the use of the internet. 

The issue of infrastructural layout in primary school classrooms and how it impacts on teaching and 
learning is explored in greater detail in chapter 5. 

From the case-study schools evaluated it seems that while the computer room might be a more 
efficient way of managing the computers in a school it does not always guarantee regular access to 
the technology by students. It is also clear that the computer room can sometimes be used for 
different purposes. It would appear that locating computers in classrooms provides greater access 
opportunities for students. 

47 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
Most case-study school reports recorded information about the internet connection that schools 
were using. Only one report made explicit reference to a working broadband connection. Most of 
the remainder were connecting with a dial-up system, while in a few instances it was reported that 
there was no access to the internet at all. In these reports it was stated that the relevant schools 
were awaiting broadband connection before re-establishing an internet connection. 

Internet connection in schools, where it did exist, appeared to be limited to one computer. This 
restricted students’ access, with one report stating that “internet access is strictly reserved for staff 
[members] or for supervised groups of students.” The lack of access to the internet in the classroom 
was regarded by many teachers as a barrier to the successful integration of ICT in their teaching. As 
one inspection report stated, “there is currently no internet access in any of the five classrooms 
which [the] staff identifies as a barrier to the development of the students’ ICT skills.” 

Case-study schools were generally found to have restricted access to the internet. It was regularly 
recommended in reports that schools upgrade their level of internet access for both students and 
teachers. It is expected, however, that this situation will improve with the provision of broadband 
and the networking of computers that was taking place at the time of school visits. 

ICT facilities in special-education settings 

ICT facilities comprising at least one computer were located in special-education settings in the 
majority of case-study primary schools. In one school the allocation was particularly good, with two 
special-education teachers having 

the use of three computers together with two printers and two scanners. Two students with specific 
learning needs have access to individual laptop computers. 

Case-study schools regularly acknowledged the benefits that DES grants had in providing dedicated 
technology for special education needs. A few reports, for example, noted that special-education 
teachers had access to laptop computers for their work. One report referred to “the learning-
support and resource teachers who provide support to the school on a shared teaching basis” 
having laptops for use in various schools within their cluster. In another report it was noted that 
“there are also two laptops available which are mainly used by teachers who support students with 
additional learning needs.” 

Commercially produced educational software was always used to facilitate teaching and learning in 
special-education settings. Some schools had “a commendable range of software packages that 
[were] used regularly to support students,” while others had to make do with less. In the latter case 
the schools were usually advised to expand their level of software resources. (Software issues are 
discussed further in section 3.8.) 

48 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
ICT in areas for teachers’ use 

Fifteen of the thirty-two case-study primary schools had computers available in their staff room that 
were primarily for use by teachers. The number of such computers ranged from one to five. 

While more than half the case-study schools did not provide computers in areas specifically for 
teachers’ use, it is recognised that many of these were small schools that did not have a staff room 
in the first place. In those schools it was usually reported that the teachers had the use of those 
computers that were also used by the students (i.e. those in a computer room or in classrooms). 

The majority of computers in schools that were specifically designated for teachers’ use only were 
laptops. The learning-support/resource teacher featured prominently in this regard. As will be seen 
in chapter 4, school management personnel and teachers regularly spoke of how access to such 
facilities contributed to improvements in the quality of lesson planning, preparation, and content. 

ICT in school administration 

The NCTE infrastructure census (2005) found that 95% of primary schools used computers for 
general office use, 60% used the technology for maintaining students’ records, and 48% used 
computers for accounts work. In this evaluation it was found that only fifteen of the thirty-two case-
study schools visited reported making use of computers in school administration work. The number 
of computers devoted to this work was usually one or two. Of the twelve schools that reported 
devoting two computers to this work, one was usually earmarked for the school secretary, while the 
other was for the principal. Schools should fully exploit the benefits presented by ICT in school 
administration. 

3.6.2 Organisation of ICT facilities in case-study post-primary 
schools 
A general pattern emerged from the visits made to post-primary case-study schools regarding how 
they organised their ICT facilities. Each of the twenty schools visited, for example, had at least one 
computer room.31 As already noted (section 3.5), outside of computer rooms schools tended to give 
priority to supplying computers to specialist classrooms and workshops over general classrooms. The 
level of permeation of ICT in learning spaces in the case-study post-primary schools was described 
by inspectors as being “in all classrooms” (both specialist and general) in two schools visited. ICT 
was found to have permeated the “majority of classrooms” in one school, while it was reported to 
have permeated “some classrooms” in fifteen schools. ICT was reported to be “non-existent” in the 
classrooms of two of the twenty schools visited. Computers featured prominently in areas that were 
dedicated to working with students with special education needs. Facilities were also provided in 
some schools for the exclusive use of teachers, in staff rooms or other such areas where teachers 
could undertake planning and preparation work. ICT facilities were also used in school 
administration areas. 

31 Eleven schools had one computer room, one school had two computer rooms, five schools had three computer rooms, and three 
schools had four computer rooms. 

49 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
The dedicated computer room 

The provision in post-primary schools’ schedules of accommodation of a dedicated computer room, 
now often referred to as the multimedia learning laboratory, is a relatively new initiative. Up to 1999 
most schools were provided with a room for “commerce or business machines” in their schedules of 
accommodation. These rooms were generally equipped with typewriters. From 1999 onwards, 
however, computer rooms were formally provided, though before that many schools had converted 
existing classrooms to serve as computer rooms. 

The computer room is generally used for teaching computer skills to full class groups. The computer 
room in a new school is generally equipped with seating for up to thirty computer users, with 
computer hardware being allocated per capita.32 While the total number of computers in the 
computer rooms of the case-study schools visited varied significantly, the number found was not 
always in proportion to the school’s enrolment. One school with an enrolment of 289 students, for 
example, was found to have only fifteen computers in its computer room; another, with an 
enrolment of 397 students, had eighty-eight computers in its computer rooms; a third, with an 
enrolment of 628, had seventy-six computers; while a fourth, with an enrolment of 699, had ninety 
computers between its four computer rooms. The average number of computers in the computer 
rooms of case-study schools was twenty-four. With regard to rooms with an above-average number 
of computers inspectors usually commented that such schools had a “generously equipped” or 
“well-equipped” computer room. The proviso was usually added, however, that the equipment was 
not always up to date. 

Inspectors found that most of the case-study schools had availed of DES funding to either create or 
develop the computer network in their school.33 It was found, for example, that almost all the 
schools visited had a network system in their computer room (or rooms), but a few computer rooms 
also included a number of stand-alone computers. Almost all the network systems installed were 
wired, though one report referred to a school having a wireless network. While no network was 
installed in a small number of schools visited, it was reported that those schools had plans to have 
one installed. Approximately a quarter of the schools visited had two or more networking domains, 
one usually administrative, the other devoted to use by the students. One school had four 
networking domains, but the report on this school recommended the consolidation of these 
networks so that “all computers, with the exception of those used in administration, are on the 
same network and have access to the internet.” 

The introduction of the broadband initiative was still in progress at the time of the case-study school 
visits. In some schools it was reported that broadband access was already available, while others 
were in the process of acquiring such access. Nevertheless, all the schools visited had some form of 
internet access. In one school only one computer had internet access, but in all other schools 
students had access to the internet via the school’s computer network. Teachers interviewed 
reported the internet as being a very valuable teaching resource. In particular, they felt that the 

32 See www.education.ie for layouts and specifications for new computer rooms. 
33 See chapter 1 for details of DES grants to schools. 

50 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
internet allowed for a wide range of digital resources to be brought into the classroom for activities 
in which the students did their own research or engaged in interactive activities on-line. (This issue is 
explored in greater detail in chapter 6.) 

Almost all the case-study school reports referred to the timetabling arrangements for the computer 
room (or rooms). Approximately half the reports quantified the time for which computer rooms 
were timetabled; occupancy ranged from 30% to almost 90%, with the average being slightly more 
than 60%. In schools where the timetabled occupancy was low it was generally reported that this 
was to allow teachers to use the room and its facilities as the need arose. However, there was 
regular mention during interviews with teachers that the practicalities involved in taking a group of 
students to a computer room tended to discourage them from doing so. Furthermore, a few ICT coordinators 
spoke of problems that tended to arise when there was unplanned use by teachers of the 
school’s computer room (for example technical problems, breakage, and tampering with systems). 
For subject teachers to make greater use of computer rooms, school managements would need to 
ensure that a simple and accessible system exists for booking the room. Such a booking system did 
not exist in many of the case-study schools visited; approximately a quarter of all evaluation reports 
referred to the need for some form of booking system to be implemented. It is also important that 
rules for the computer room are established and that these are regularly brought to the attention of 
all teachers and students who use the room. 

ICT facilities in specialist and general classrooms 

While a computer room is normally used for teaching computer skills to an entire class group, 
computers in specialist or general classrooms are generally intended to support the use of ICT as a 
teaching aid for subjects. ICT was found in one or more of the specialist rooms in the case-study 
schools visited. Specialist rooms in which such facilities were commonly found included science 
laboratories and technology workshops, along with those rooms dedicated to Art, Craft and Design, 
Music, Geography, Career Guidance and Home Economics. In most reports in which the number of 
computers in specialist rooms was given it was noted that they contained only one or two 
computers. In one report, however, it was noted that a science laboratory contained six computers. 
This level of provision allowed for the potential use of the computers by small groups of students. 
The more common situation of having a single computer in a room generally meant that it was used 
either solely by the teacher or in rotation by students, either in pairs or individually. Most school 
libraries were also equipped with some ICT equipment. 

In contrast with specialist rooms, the permeation of computers in general classrooms was found to 
be more limited. Only two of the twenty case-study schools were found to have computers in all 
their general classrooms. Of the remaining eighteen schools, each principal generally expressed the 
view that they would like to see this level of permeation of ICT throughout their school in the years 
to come. The majority of principals who responded to the questionnaire also expressed this view in 
the context of their vision for the development of ICT in their school. One principal, for example, 
identified the following priorities: to increase the incidence of ICT usage by the teaching staff; to 

51 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
support and up-skill teachers in ICT usage; and to put ICT hardware and software in place in 
classrooms. 

Of these eighteen schools, one was described as having computer facilities in the “majority” of 
general classrooms, while fifteen had computers in “some” general classrooms. In only two of the 
schools visited was it reported that there were no computers in any general classrooms. In their 
evaluation reports it was common for inspectors to recommend an expansion, as resources 
permitted, of the number of computers made available to general classrooms. A few reports advised 
schools to consider, as an interim measure, setting up a mobile ICT facility that could be shared 
between classrooms. 

ICT facilities and special needs 

The level of provision of ICT equipment in the area of special educational needs varied considerably 
from school to school at post-primary level. A few reports commented on the high level of provision 
of ICT for use in this area. One report, for example, commented that “the learning support and 
resource areas are particularly well catered for,” while another noted that “the learning-support 
room has twelve laptop computers.” Conversely, one report spoke of the special-education teachers 
having only “a desktop computer and a printer.” In addition to the availability of computers and 
peripherals, a few reports also referred to the provision of software in this area. One report referred 
to the availability of “an extensive library of educational software for use with special needs 
students,” while another noted that “educational software is confined predominantly to the area of 
special needs education.” (Further reference is made to the issue of computer software in special 
education in section 3.8.) 

ICT facilities in staff rooms 

Schools that made dedicated computer facilities available for teachers’ use reported that it 
encouraged the teachers to engage with the technology and that it also led to improvements in the 
quality of the resources used in teaching. The survey of teachers (as mentioned in section 3.5) found 
that 85% used computers in the staff room for school-related activities. Of the case-study schools 
visited, approximately a quarter provided one or two computers in the staff room, a quarter 
provided between three and five computers, while approximately another quarter provided more 
than ten computers for the use of the staff. In a few schools some or all of the teachers were 
provided with their own laptops; one school reported that they intended to extend this facility to 
students. In a few schools it was reported that teachers used computers in the computer room for 
lesson planning and preparation purposes; and in schools that had computers in classrooms it was 
reported also that the teachers based in such classrooms generally used these for planning and 
preparation purposes. 

ICT in school administration 

Most evaluation reports on case-study schools made reference to the level of ICT equipment in 
administrative areas. In this regard the inspectors noted the use of ICT equipment in the offices of 

52 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
school secretaries, of senior and middle school management personnel, and of guidance counsellors 
and chaplains. It was noted that computers used for administrative purposes were usually on a 
separate network from those available for academic use. The NCTE infrastructure census (2005) 
found that 59% of post-primary schools had a separate network for school administration. This is 
considered good practice, as it affords a higher level of security for sensitive school data. 

While not all post-primary schools use computer applications to construct their annual timetables,34 
all the case-study schools visited were found to do so. Indeed the majority of case-study schools 
were also found to use suitable applications to keep detailed information on students; the NCTE 
infrastructure census (2005) found that 94% of post-primary schools used ICT for this purpose. 
Schools found this computerisation of students’ records to be of particular benefit when liaising 
with parents on such issues as behaviour, academic progress, and attendance and punctuality, as the 
school was in a position to obtain accurate information quickly. With regard to attendance and 
punctuality in particular, a few of the schools that were visited implemented a computerised student 
attendance system, whereby students were required to check in each morning using their own 
swipe card. While such a system has certain loopholes, these schools reported that the system had a 
positive influence on attendance and punctuality patterns. 

During interviews a few school principals spoke of the need for appropriate ICT training to be 
provided for personnel in the efficient use of computers in school administration. The Education 
Services Initiative (ESI) of the DES should extend schools’ use of ICT in its administrative work.35 

3.7 ICT peripherals 
Teachers were asked in their national surveys what peripherals they used in their teaching and how 
often they used them. The range of peripherals used and the extent of their use are shown in fig. 

3.6 and fig. 3.7 for primary and post-primary schools, respectively. 
34 As evidenced by (a) the NCTE infrastructure census (2005), which found that 89 % of post-primary schools used computers to 

construct their timetables, and (b) the fact that some schools continue to make their October returns to the DES with conventional 

methods. October returns comprise details of enrolments that schools return to the Department of Education and Science at the 

beginning of October each year. 
35 The purpose of the ESI is to develop a web-based “one-stop shop” portal and specific applications for providing on-line services to 

schools, replacing paper-based systems. The first application to be developed under this project is the On-Line Claims System. Other 

services will be developed in a number of phases. 

53 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
Fig. 3.6: Frequency of use of ICT peripherals by primary teachers 

How frequently do you use the following peripherals/equipment in 
your teaching? 

Printers 
Digital still cameras 
Scanners 
Digital video cameras 
Data projectors - mobile 
MP3 players 
Data projectors - fixed 
Interactive whiteboards 

80%60% 100%40%20%0% 
22%43% 16% 
14% 33% 
12% 23% 
12% 
10% 
At least once a week 
About 2/3 times a month 
Less than twice a month 

Base: All primary teachers (n = 1162) 

Fig. 3.7: Frequency of use of ICT peripherals by post-primary teachers 

Printers 
Scanners 
Data projectors - mobile 
Digital still cameras 
Data projectors - fixed 
Digital video cameras 
Datalogging sensors 
Dataloggers 
Interactive whiteboards 

How frequently do you use the following peripherals/equipment in 
your teaching? 

40%30% 50% 60%20%10%0% 
12%33% 13% 
11% 10% 17% 
9% 6% 12% 
3% 6% 17% 
13% 4% 
2% 9% 
2% 8% 
2% 8% 
3% 
6% 
At least once a week 
About 2/3 times a month 
Less than twice a month 

Base: All post-primary teachers (800) 

54 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
Printers were found to be the most commonly used ICT peripherals in both primary and post-
primary schools: 65% of primary and 45% of post-primary teachers reported making use of a 
printer at least two or three times per month. The use of the printer at primary level was higher 
among teachers of senior classes (72%). 

The next most frequently used peripherals at primary level were digital cameras and scanners, both 
being used at least two or three times a month by 19% of teachers. Again, the use of these 
peripherals was found to be higher among teachers of senior classes (25%). 

Data projectors (fixed or mobile), scanners and digital (still) cameras were the next most commonly 
used peripherals at post-primary level. When the data was analysed by subject area at post-primary 
level it was found that a relatively low proportion of teachers of Irish used ICT peripherals in 
comparison with teachers of Mathematics and the science and applied science subjects. Interactive 
whiteboards were uncommon in both primary and post-primary schools. 

While significant numbers of teachers at both primary and post-primary level use printers, the 
general use of peripherals is quite low. For example, 19% of primary teachers and 42% of post-
primary teachers reported never using a printer in their teaching, while approximately 50% of 
primary teachers and more than 70% of post-primary teachers reported never using a digital still 
camera in their teaching. 

In the primary case-study schools, printers were also the predominant peripheral. In one five-teacher 
school in particular there were sixteen printers, while its only other piece of peripheral equipment 
was a digital camera. The prevalence of printers in primary schools, however, raises questions 
relating to how schools make decisions concerning the purchase of peripherals, and how they meet 
their needs while at the same time ensuring that good value is received. It would appear that 
primary schools in particular need advice regarding the purchase of ICT peripherals. Indeed some 
evaluation reports made recommendations concerning ICT peripherals. These usually encouraged 
schools to consider expanding their level of ICT peripherals. Data projectors featured strongly in such 
recommendations, as they were present in less than a third of the case-study schools visited, almost 
exclusively the larger schools. Scanners and digital cameras closely followed data projectors. 

Post-primary case-study schools reported making regular use of printers and data projectors and, to 
a lesser extent, scanners, digital cameras, digital camcorders, data-logging equipment, and CD 
writers. Reference was constantly made during evaluations to one of these peripherals in particular, 
namely the data projector. Teachers viewed the data projector as a tool that could significantly 
enhance the teaching and learning process. Many described how the projector could “bring the 
subject matter to life” through, for example, multimedia presentations (i.e. presentations that 
include a combination of effects, such as animation, music, and text). It was also regularly described 
as being a “visually effective tool,” particularly from the students’ viewpoint, because of the larger 

55 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
screen it facilitates. Finally, the majority of teachers interviewed mentioned that using the data 
projector also allowed them more time to engage with students, as opposed to having to spend 
time writing or drawing on the blackboard. In a few schools it was reported that one or more data 
projectors were mobile, thus facilitating their use by greater numbers of teachers in their own 
classroom environments. 

In more than a quarter of the evaluation reports for post-primary case-study schools the inspectors 
recommended the purchase, as funds became available, of additional data projectors. In some cases 
it was recommended that the projectors be mobile, so that they could be moved from classroom to 
classroom as required, or that a specific room be equipped with a data projector so that teachers 
could bring their students to that room as required. Such alternative arrangements would be made 
in accordance with a school’s particular circumstances. Given the undoubted benefits of using a 
data projector to facilitate teaching and learning, it is clear that every classroom should ideally have 
access to this equipment. 

3.8 Software 
Teachers in all the case-study schools visited reported making use of software as a teaching aid. The 
most popular type of software used at primary level was content-rich.36 Exploratory37 and reference 
software (for example encyclopaedias) were also available, but to a more limited extent. The most 
popular type at post-primary level was subject-specific software; this was particularly so in the case 
of special-education teachers (see section 3.6.2). The availability of these types of software, 
however, varied considerably from school to school. 

In general, it was found that only limited areas of the primary school curriculum were supported by 
software. A few reports from the case-study schools mentioned software being available for 
particular curricular areas only. The more popular areas supported by software were the Visual Arts, 
Music, and Social, Environmental and Scientific Education (SESE). In the area of SESE, History and 
Geography were the more popular areas supported by software. Irish was the least-supported area. 
Only one school report mentioned that Irish was supported through the use of software, while 
another mentioned that “a satisfactory range of content-rich software is provided for most areas of 
the curriculum with the exception of Irish.” All reports, however, mentioned that software was 
regularly used to help develop students’ literacy and numeracy skills. It is of interest also that a small 
number of reports made mention of the lack of software available in schools, despite grants being 
provided for the purchase of equipment, peripherals, and software. 

It was clear that many teachers in both primary and post-primary schools were unaware of the 
range of software already available to them in their school. Many inspectors recommended, 
therefore, that schools develop an inventory of the software, and in some cases hardware also, 

36 Content-rich software can also be described as tutorial-based software, usually subject-specific and with little or no interactivity. 
37 Simulation-type software, usually subject-specific but with a high level of interactivity. 

56 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
already available in the school. It was further recommended that these inventories be circulated to 
teachers so as to create a greater awareness of the ICT facilities readily available to them. It was also 
seen as important that such inventories be regularly updated. 

A few reports, particularly for post-primary schools, suggested that a tracking system be developed 
for the movement of ICT facilities within schools. It is also worth noting that, of the teachers who 
reported having limited software resources, many admitted to not having submitted a request for 
such software to their school management. In light of this fact it is recommended that teachers or 
their subject departments (post-primary) draw up a list of software resources, perhaps annually and 
in collaboration with their school’s ICT co-ordinator, that would be suited to the teaching and 
learning in their classroom or subject (or subjects). The list should then be submitted to the 
management of the school for consideration. 

During interviews with teachers in case-study schools many of those who were members of their 
school’s special-education team raised the issue of the appropriateness of the match between the 
equipment and software they used and the needs of their students. Many reported that they lacked 
an awareness of what support was available and how they could acquire it. This is an area in which 
the NCTE, in collaboration with the Special Education Support Service (SESS), could assist schools 
even further, particularly with regard to advising them on the range and type of devices and 
software available for use with students with special educational needs. There is an opportunity 
here, perhaps, to disseminate the outcome of such projects as Solas38 and the Laptop Initiative.39 

3.9 Use of e-mail 
The first NCTE census of ICT infrastructure in schools (2002) found that 16% of teachers in primary 
schools and 23% in post-primary schools were provided with a personalised e-mail account by their 
school. By 2005 these figures had risen to 35% and 30%, respectively.40 In the national surveys 
used as part of this evaluation it was found that a little more than a third of teachers in both primary 
(35%) and post-primary (34%) schools were provided with an e-mail address by their school. At 
primary level in particular the proportion was higher for male teachers (45%), teachers over thirty-
five (45%), teachers in schools with a low SCR (40%), and teachers of senior classes (43%). 

38 SOLAS was an education research project, launched in 1997 and funded by the NCTE, aimed at meeting the special educational 
needs of pupils with physical and sensory impairments, especially in mainstream education. The project involved the publication of a 
document entitled Enabling Technologies: Guidelines for the Use of Assistive Technology in Education. More information on this 
project can be found at www.enabletech.ie. 

39 This initiative was launched in 2000 and was aimed at identifying how laptop computers could best be used to support second-level 
pupils with dyslexia or other reading difficulties in inclusive environments. The initiative provided grants for the purchase of laptops 
for individual pupils and for the purchase of back-up equipment in each of the thirty-one schools involved. Specialist training for 
teachers involved in the project in these schools was also provided. The initiative was completed in 2005, and a book and CD entitled 
Engaging Learners: Mobile Technology, Literacy and Inclusion were published the following year. Further details on the initiative are 
available on a special web site, www.laptopsinitiative.ie. 

40 See NCTE (2006), NCTE 2005 Census on ICT Infrastructure in Schools: Statistical Report. 

57 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
Despite the level of provision of e-mail for teachers, it was found that considerably fewer reported 
using e-mail for class-related activities. Only 7% of all teachers at primary level and 8% at post-
primary level reported using e-mail with students as part of class-related activities. At primary level, 
use in class was found to be higher for senior classes (14%) and for male teachers (13%). At post-
primary level, when the findings are examined by subject area, as shown in fig. 3.8, some 
differences become apparent. 

Fig. 3.8: Provision and use of e-mail address by subject taught, post-primary schools 

E-mail address provision and usage by subject taught 

60% 
40% 
20% 
0% 
39% 
2% 
37% 
11% 
35% 
10% 
33% 
6% 
32% 32% 32% 
9% 8% 8% 
27% 
5% 
26% 
4% 
Irish Business Foreign Mathematics Social Social Applied English Science 
Studies Languages Studies I Studies II Science 


Has your school provided you with an e-mail address? 
Do you use e-mail with your students for class related activities? 

Base: All post-primary students (n=800) 

The provision of e-mail addresses to post-primary teachers was highest for teachers of Irish (39%), 
Business Studies (37%) and foreign languages (35%). One reason for this could be that teachers of 
these subjects, particularly the language and business studies subjects, are likely to be engaged in 
projects that involve communication with businesses, with other schools, or with teachers in 
different countries. Interestingly, these categories of teachers did not feature highly among those 
teachers who had access to computers in their classrooms. A slightly lower proportion of English 
teachers (27%) and teachers of science subjects (26%) received an e-mail address from their school. 

Teachers of Business Studies, foreign languages and subjects in the social studies I group of subjects 
(History, Geography, Music and Art, Craft and Design) were found to be the best users of e-mail for 
class-related activities. Teachers of Mathematics, English and Science had a relatively low proportion 
of e-mail use, while use among teachers of Irish was lowest. In general, it can be said that the 
provision of e-mail is not always synonymous with its use. 

58 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
Not surprisingly, the survey found a correlation between use in class and the provision of an e-mail 
address by a school. At primary level, 11% of teachers in schools that provided their teachers with 
an e-mail address used e-mail with their students, compared with 7% nationally; at post-primary 
level the corresponding figures were 13% and 8%. Given the fact (as noted earlier) that slightly 
more than a third of teachers at both levels are provided with e-mail addresses by their schools, it is 
clear that many teachers are using their own e-mail address with their students. However, when 
schools provide this facility for their teachers its use is greatly increased. 

Teachers who used e-mail reported that it presented opportunities to communicate with other 
teachers and schools, with parents, with industry, and with the local community. It provided 
opportunities to enhance teaching and learning. Popular examples of the use of e-mail at both 
primary and post-primary level included e-mailing other students as part of school twinning projects 
and requesting information from companies or agencies for research purposes. Communication 
with companies regarding work experience was also popular at post-primary level. 

The provision of a dedicated e-mail service to schools and their teaching staff should be given 
priority within the introduction of the NCTE-managed Schools Broadband Access Programme. With 
regard to those schools and teachers who are already provided with such a facility, efforts could 
perhaps be directed towards encouraging its use as part of classroom practice. 

3.10 The on-line environment 
3.10.1 The learning platform 
While it is known that some schools make use of their own on-line learning platform, the evaluation 
found no evidence of such platforms being used in any of the case-study schools visited. Learning 
platform is an umbrella term that describes a broad range of ICT systems used to provide and 
support learning and teaching. It usually combines several functions, such as organising, mapping 
and implementing curriculum activities, as well as providing a facility for teachers and students to 
have a dialogue about these activities, all by means of ICT. The term is sometimes applied to a virtual 
learning environment (VLE)41 or to the components of a managed learning environment (MLE).42 

Learning platforms give every student access to personal on-line web space, where they can do such 
things as store work and record their achievements. They also give every teacher access to teaching 
resources and tools to support lesson planning and teaching and learning. They also facilitate 
“personalised learning” by enabling teachers to tailor the curriculum to the needs of individual 
students. The experience of a learning platform can vary from school to school. However, where 

41 A VLE is a software tool that brings together resources for curriculum mapping, implementation, assessment, tutor support, 
communication, and tracking. 

42 A managed learning environment (MLE) comprises the whole range of information systems and processes that facilitate learning and 
the management of learning within an institution. It includes VLEs or other learning platforms and administrative and other support 
systems. 

59 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
there is a strong determination to embed the platform in the working practices of a school, the 
benefits for teachers, students and parents can be impressive. An effective learning platform can 
also support school management and administration. 

Benefits of learning platforms for teachers 
An effective learning platform can enable teachers to 
• create and share teaching materials that can be accessed on line, printed out, or used with an 
interactive whiteboard or data projector 
• put their resources on line page by page, lesson plan by lesson plan, so that colleagues can 
access them both in school and from home, thus facilitating collaboration within their subject 
area 
• obtain access to a wide variety of learning materials that they can customise for the exact needs 
of their students 
• obtain access to lesson plans from colleagues to facilitate cover for teacher substitution 
• assess, monitor and track individual and group progress 
• receive submissions of work from students in one area that is easy to manage 
• manage, within personal desktop space, their timetables, diary, e-mail, and discussions 
• increase their ICT competence and confidence. 
Benefits of learning platforms for students 
An effective learning platform can enable students to 
• obtain access to learning materials created by their teachers and others, outside lesson time and 
from locations such as their local library or home 
• store their work and notes on line for use in assignments, homework and revision, outside 
normal school hours 
• work at their own pace and with a wider choice of learning styles, through a more personalised 
curriculum 
• create an on-line portfolio, including digital photographs and videos of performance, as well as 
text 
• improve their ICT skills and on-line management of materials 
• submit homework and assignments for marking and assessment 
• communicate by e-mail and participate in live discussions and forums with other students and 
with teachers. 
Benefits of learning platforms for parents 
An effective learning platform can enable parents to 
• play a greater part in their child’s learning, where they have access to the learning platform from 
home 
• support children in learning that takes place outside school 
• obtain access to their child’s personal home page to keep track of their work and the curriculum 
60 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
• view reports, attendance data, and scores in assessment activities 
• communicate effectively with teachers, school administrators and others supporting their child’s 
learning 
• engage with wider school issues through on-line communication tools 
• become active partners with the school. 
Benefits of learning platforms for administration and management 
An effective learning platform can 
• provide up-to-date management information on attendance and attainment 
• track the progress of individuals and groups of students 
• collate summative and formative assessments 
• reduce the administrative burden on teachers by using transferable data 
• enable communication within school and beyond, one to one, one to many, or many to many 
• increase communication with parents. 
When they are implemented effectively it is clear that learning platforms can have many benefits for 
schools, including “any time, anywhere” learning, greater parental involvement, the development 
of personalised learning, better use of teachers’ time, enhanced effectiveness of substitution 
teachers, collaboration, cross-institutional working, and increased inclusion of students in both their 
school and personal work. The school of the future will in all likelihood be operating its own 
learning platform; indeed some schools are already operating such systems, while others are 
experimenting with the technology. It is recommended that schools that have effectively 
implemented their own learning platforms be identified as models of good practice for other 
schools. The NCTE could play a role in identifying such schools and in disseminating their practices 
and experiences among other schools. 

3.10.2 The school web site 
Schools with their own web site regard it as a means of informing the public about their school and 
as a way of promoting the work done in their school. Some websites contain information on 
initiatives and projects that the school is involved in, as well as examples of students’ work. 

The national surveys of teachers asked respondents to state whether their school had a web site 
and, if so, whether there were examples of students’ work displayed on it. Fig. 3.9 and fig. 3.10 
give details of the responses received from primary and post-primary teachers, respectively. 

61 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
Fig. 3.9: The primary school web site: teachers’ responses 

If yes, is there pupil project work on

Does your school have a school website? 

the website? 

No 61% Yes 39% 
Base: All primary teachers (n = 1162) 


No 68% Yes 32% 
Base: All primary teachers from schools 
with a website (n = 425) 


Approximately 39% of primary teachers stated that their school had a web site, and of these 
approximately a third (32%) stated that their site contained reference to, or details of, work done by 
students. A higher proportion of teachers of senior classes stated that their web site contained 
reference to work done by their students (41% of teachers of senior classes, compared with 29% of 
teachers of junior classes). 

The survey of fifth-class students found that 41% did not know whether their school had a web site 
(even though approximately a quarter of these students were in schools that did have one). Of those 
who were aware (37%), only 20% said that their work had appeared on the site. A much higher 
proportion of girls (32%) stated that their work had appeared on their school web site than boys 
(11%). 

Fig. 3.10: The post-primary school web site: teachers’ responses 

Does your school have a school website? If yes, is there student project work on the website? 

No 18% 
Don’t 
know 
9% 
Yes 73% 
Base: All post-primary teachers (n = 800) 


No 52% 
Yes 20% Don’t 
know 28% 
Base: All post-primary teachers from schools 
with a website (n = 567) 


62 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
Nearly three-quarters (73%) of all post-primary teachers stated that their school had a web site. Of 
those who did, however, only 20% reported that their site contained a reference to, or details of, 
project work or other work done by students. A similar pattern of findings emerged from the survey 
of fifth-year students. Approximately 30% of students did not know whether their school had a 
web site (approximately half of these students were in schools that did have a web site). Of those 
who were aware that their school had a web site, only 36% had had the opportunity to contribute 
to it. 

While an awareness of security issues associated with the internet must be borne in mind, these 
findings are disappointing. Firstly, a considerable proportion of schools do not have their own web 
site. Secondly, a sizable portion of those schools that do have a web site do not seem to actively 
promote it. Finally, some schools are opting, either consciously or unconsciously, not to present 
students’ work or other work done in their school. This is surprising in an age when many people 
automatically resort to the internet when looking for information on schools. 

While numerous evaluation reports on case-study schools referred to the desirability of a school 
either establishing its own web site or developing the use of its existing site, it was also clear that, of 
those schools that already had one, many experienced difficulties in both developing and 
maintaining the site. Difficulties encountered at both primary and post-primary level included a lack 
of technical expertise among staff members. At post-primary level it was usually the ICT co


63 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
ordinator who was responsible for maintaining the site, and for those co-ordinators who were not 
ICT experts this task proved difficult and sometimes even frustrating. Even those co-ordinators who 
were comfortable with web site development reported difficulties in finding the time to devote to 
such work. In a few schools it was found that some senior students were responsible for setting up 
and maintaining the site. In those schools it was reported that this encouraged students in general 
to contribute to the site. Security issues with the internet also proved a problem, particularly at 
primary level. 

Despite the provision by the NCTE of dedicated support for schools for web site development, it 
would appear that most schools remain in need of advice, guidance or assistance regarding the 
setting up and maintenance of a web site. The NCTE should explore options for providing additional 
support to schools in relation to web site development. 

3.11Summary of findings and recommendations 

3.11.1 Main findings 
Funding issues 

• The student-computer ratio (SCR) for the majority of the thirty-two case study primary schools 
visited ranged from between 8:1 and 12:1. At post primary level, the SCR for the majority of the 
twenty schools visited ranged from between 5.2:1 and 8.4:1. These ratios were broadly in line 
with the findings of the NCTE census (2005) of ICT in schools which found a SCR in primary 
schools of 9.1:1 and 7:1 in post-primary schools. 

• DES grants make possible a significant improvement in schools’ ICT facilities, but they are 
frequently augmented by funding from other sources. Parents’ councils and other parents’ 
groups usually play a significant role here. The spending of private funds on computers, however, 
may contribute to an exacerbation of the digital divide, as some schools may be able to raise 
more private funds than others. 

• The lack of technical support and maintenance was found to be a major impediment to the 
development of ICT by schools. Furthermore, a number of schools have equipment that is 
obsolete and should be disposed of. 

ICT advisory service 

• The impact of the present ICT advisory service is limited. While it is acknowledged that levels of 
awareness of the service among teachers varied, awareness is generally low among both primary 
(48%) and post-primary (37%) teachers. Awareness was much higher, however, among ICT coordinators. 


64 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
• The use of the ICT advisory service was also found to be low. Of the 48% of teachers who 
reported awareness of the service at primary level only 46% (or 22% of all respondents) reported 
availing of it. At post-primary level this figure fell to 15% of all respondents. 

• There was high satisfaction with the information on, and availability of, ICT courses among those 
teachers who availed of the ICT advisory service. There were also high levels of satisfaction with 
the quality of the technical advice and the advice provided on classroom use of ICT. 

• A somewhat lower satisfaction rating, however, was associated with the quality of the school 
visits by the ICT advisor. At both primary and post-primary level, 42% of teachers who had 
received a school visit felt that the service received was either “fair” or “poor.” 

ICT access 

• All schools were found to provide both teachers and students with relatively high levels of access 
to computer facilities. 
• At primary level, the teachers of senior classes were more likely than teachers of junior 
classes to be provided with computer facilities for use at home. Furthermore, the location of 
computers in classrooms, as distinct from computer rooms, provided greater ICT access 
opportunities for students. 
• At post-primary level a little over a third of the teachers surveyed reported having access to 
computers in their own classroom. Teachers of subjects that require specialist rooms were 
more likely to have ICT facilities in their classroom. There is a greater permeation of 
computers in specialist rooms than in general classrooms at post-primary level. 

• Case-study primary schools were generally found to have restricted internet access. Most schools 
had access by means of a dial-up connection only; in some schools access was limited to one 
computer, while others had no access at all. Networking is developing in primary schools, 
although at a relatively slow pace. 

• Special-education teachers, particularly at primary level, were found to have good access to ICT 
facilities in their support settings. 

Computer rooms 

• Computer rooms are generally a feature of larger primary schools but are liable be used for a 
range of purposes. Most schools do not have space for such rooms. Both the national survey of 
principals and case-study evaluations found, however, that access to computers was more 
frequent and more relaxed in situations where computers were located in classrooms. 

• The average number of computers found in the computer rooms of case-study post-primary 
schools was twenty-four. Most computer rooms were networked and had broadband access or 

65 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
were working on acquiring such access. The timetabled occupancy of these rooms per week 

ranged from 30% to 90%, with the average being a little over 60%. 

Software and web sites 

• While computer applications are used often as a teaching aid, particularly in the area of special 
educational needs, not all staff members in schools are clear about the nature and range of 
software that is already available to them in their school. Most of the software in primary schools 
is content-rich and is predominantly used to promote literacy and numeracy. 

• A sizable proportion of schools do not have their own web site. Of those that do, many do not 
actively promote it or use it to maximum effect. Schools do, however, experience difficulties in 
developing and maintaining a web site. 

3.11.2 Recommendations 
Recommendations for policy-makers and policy advisors 

• Consideration needs to be given to improving the level of ICT resources available to schools. 
Ireland should be working towards enabling schools to equip all classrooms with an appropriate 
level of ICT infrastructure. Consideration should be given to equipping all classrooms with a 
computer for use by the teacher, broadband internet access with adequate bandwidth, and a 
fixed data projector and screen for use by the teacher in presentations. Furthermore, to ensure 
appropriate access to ICT by students, Ireland should strive to reduce its student-computer ratio 
(SCR) from the present 9.1:1 in primary schools and 7:1 in post-primary schools. International 
evidence suggests that countries that have taken a lead in this area are aiming for or achieving a 
ratio of 5:1 or less in all schools. Funding for ICT in schools should seek to provide schools with 
the capacity not only to acquire ICT facilities but also to upgrade their ICT systems and to 
manage obsolescence of computers and other equipment on a planned basis. 

• ICT maintenance in schools needs to be addressed in a co-ordinated fashion at system level so 
that all schools can benefit from having a secure and reliable infrastructure that will facilitate the 
integration of ICT throughout the school. This could entail the introduction of a quality ICT 
maintenance initiative for schools. (See section 7.3.1 for further comment on this 
recommendation.) The role of the ICT advisory service should be reviewed within the context of 
such an initiative. 

• Schools that have effectively implemented their own learning platforms should be identified as 
models of good practice for other schools. The NCTE could play a role in identifying such schools 
and in disseminating information about their practices among other schools. 

66 



ICT Infrastructure in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 3 
• The NCTE, in collaboration with the SESS, should develop existing guidelines (and create new 
guidelines where appropriate) for schools regarding the range and type of assistive technology 
devices and software available for use with students with special educational needs. 

• Most schools require advice, guidance and assistance regarding the development and 
maintenance of a school web site. The NCTE should explore how schools might be further 
supported in this regard. 

• There is a lack of appropriate software in schools to promote Irish, as well as software using Irish 
instructions. Software companies should be encouraged to fill this void. 

• Primary schools require guidance regarding the purchase of computer hardware and software, 
particularly in relation to the purchase of ICT peripherals. The NCTE is well placed to provide this 
advice. 

Recommendations for schools 

Support services 

• Schools should make use of relevant specialist support services as fully as possible. School 
principals and ICT co-ordinators should encourage classroom and subject teachers to liaise with 
such services where applicable. 

Funding 

• Schools should endeavour to allocate a separate annual budget for the maintenance and 
development of their ICT systems. Furthermore, schools should use ICT grants promptly when 
they are received. 

• The usefulness of older computers and equipment should be reviewed regularly. If it is decided 
that computers are obsolete they should be disposed of properly. 

ICT equipment and resources 

• As resources permit, schools should work towards providing all teaching and learning spaces with 
ICT facilities. At primary level the emphasis should be on locating computers in classrooms, as this 
seems to provide greater access opportunities for students. At post-primary level, schools should 
ensure, as far as possible, an equitable distribution of facilities between specialist and general 
classrooms. As an interim arrangement schools could give consideration to setting up a mobile 
ICT facility that could be shared between classrooms. 

• As appropriate opportunities arise, schools should develop the range of ICT peripherals and 
software available to facilitate teaching and learning. Consideration should be given to acquiring 
data projectors, digital cameras and interactive whiteboards. 

67 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
• Schools should develop inventories of the ICT hardware and software facilities available to their 
staff. These inventories should be updated and circulated to staff members regularly so as that 
teachers are fully informed at all times of the range of ICT facilities available to them. 

• Schools should carry out a regular ICT needs analysis in the area of special educational needs. 
This would help ensure the best match possible between specialised technology and applications 
and the needs of students with special educational needs. 

ICT access 

• Schools should ensure that staff members and students have adequate access to the internet. 

• Schools with a computer room (or rooms) should ensure maximum access to the room for their 
students. To facilitate this, in addition to appropriate timetabling, a simple and accessible system 
for booking the room should be adopted for teachers. It is also important that rules for the 
computer room are established and that these are regularly brought to the attention of all users 
of the room. 

• The provision of a dedicated e-mail service to schools and their teaching staff should be given 
priority within the introduction of the schools broadband network. Efforts should also be directed 
at encouraging teachers to use e-mail as part of their classroom practice. 

The on-line environment 

• Schools should strive to develop their own on-line learning platform. In addition, schools should 
develop their own web sites so as to facilitate better awareness of school activities, 
developments, and policies in the school and the wider community. 

Administration 

• Schools should fully exploit the benefits offered by ICT in school administration, especially in the 
areas of students’ records and timetabling. 

68 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools 
Chapter 4 
69ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools 
Chapter 4 
69

ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
4.1 Introduction 
This chapter is concerned with ICT planning in schools. It begins by reviewing the planning process 
in schools and then takes a close look at the management and co-ordination arrangements that 
prevail in schools with regard to ICT provision. In this context, reference is made to the work of ICT 
steering committees and ICT co-ordinators. The chapter then looks at the ICT plan or, more 
specifically, how such plans are developed and what they contain. The acceptable-use policy (AUP) is 
another important aspect of ICT planning, and this is also examined. The chapter also considers the 
implementation of ICT planning in schools, particularly with regard to teachers’ access to, and take-
up of, ICT professional development training, the extent of usage by individual teachers of ICT for 
lesson-planning purposes, and the level of planning conducted for the actual use of ICT in teaching. 
The chapter concludes by looking at schools’ strategic planning for the development of ICT from the 
viewpoint of principals and teachers. 

4.2 The planning process 
The Schools IT 2000 initiative (referred to in chapter 1) was in many ways the catalyst for the 
development of ICT planning by schools. Through a variety of methods, the initiative sought to 
provide schools with support that would assist them in their ICT planning and in other areas of 
technology integration and skills development. The model of school planning encouraged under this 
initiative was one that integrated regular monitoring and periodic and systematic review. The 
initiative also required schools to adopt an ICT plan in order to attract funding. 

70 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
In 2002 the NCTE issued an ICT planning and advice pack to all schools. The pack provided 
information and advice to help schools in preparing and implementing their ICT plan. The pack also 
offered schools a mechanism for the self-review of their ICT status. It also helped them to target their 
ICT funding more strategically. 

The pack advised schools to follow six steps in developing their ICT plan: 

(a) Consider what the educational objectives and priorities of the school ICT plan should be. In 
particular, the plan should emphasise the effective use of ICT in teaching and learning situations, 
rather than concentrating exclusively on the acquisition of equipment or ICT skills. 
(b) Convene an ICT steering committee to manage the development and implementation of the 
plan and to make the planning process fully inclusive. 
(c) Conduct an audit of the school’s resources to determine the level of ICT provision and identify 
the extent to which the provision is meeting the needs of teachers and students. 
(d) Consider the following five areas as a framework for the plan: ICT management and planning, 
ICT and the curriculum, staff members’ professional development, school’s ICT culture, and ICT 
resources and infrastructure. 
(e) Consider budgetary matters associated with the implementation of the plan. When preparing 
the budget, ensure that provision is made for purchasing, developing and maintaining hardware, 
peripherals, networks, and software. 
(f) Ensure that the school has an ICT co-ordinator whose role is clearly defined, particularly with 
regard to the continuing implementation of the plan. 
In general, it would appear from this evaluation that the support documents made available by 
agencies and services such as the NCTE, the School Development Planning Support (SDPS) service at 
primary level and the School Development Planning Initiative (SDPI) at post-primary level, coupled 
most likely with a combination of other influencing factors,43 have had a positive impact on the level 
of ICT planning in schools. An analysis of the national survey of principals, for example, found that 
more than three-quarters of primary schools (78%), and nearly nine out of ten post-primary schools 
(88%), made use of the NCTE’s ICT Planning and Advice for Schools (2002). Furthermore, 65% of 
primary schools were also found to have made use of other ICT planning documents made available 
by the SDPS. The survey also revealed that 71% of primary schools had a written ICT plan. The 
corresponding figure for post-primary schools was considerably lower, at 46%. It was also found, 
however, that whole-school ICT planning was much more prevalent than ICT planning at the level of 
the individual teacher. 

In the primary case-study schools responsibility for managing and co-ordinating ICT normally lay with 
the principal. However, in a number of these schools the duties were undertaken by an ICT steering 
committee, or the deputy principal, or an ICT co-ordinator, or a combination of personnel. At post-
primary level the role was more usually undertaken by a nominated ICT co-ordinating teacher. Few 
schools were found to have convened ICT steering committees to assist with planning for the 
development of ICT in their school. 

43 Factors such as the ICT planning days that were organised throughout the country for school principals by the NCTE, the advice 
provided by the NCCA on ICT planning for primary schools in its Information and Communications Technology (ICT) in the Primary 
School Curriculum: Guidelines for Teachers (2004), and the introduction of whole-school evaluation (WSE) and other inspection 
activities by the DES. 

71 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
4.2.1 The ICT steering committee 
The evaluation found that ICT steering committees were not prevalent in schools. Only four of the 
thirty-two primary and twenty post-primary case-study schools visited had established a permanent 
ICT steering committee. A small number of schools, however, were found to have established a 
temporary committee. 

One of the two primary schools that had an ICT steering committee had an enrolment of a little less 
than two hundred students. In this case the permanent committee of teachers acted as a support to 
the principal, who had the main responsibility in the school for the co-ordination of ICT. In the 
second primary school, with an enrolment of fifty students, a temporary committee of three people 
had been established to assist only in the review of the school’s ICT policy. 

A number of factors contributed to the lack of steering committees in primary schools. Firstly, the 
size of the school tended to affect whether such a committee was established or not: small schools 
tended not to have access to sufficient personnel to convene a committee. Secondly, the size of a 
school’s ICT infrastructure was an influencing factor: small-scale infrastructures tended not to 
warrant the convening of a committee. Thirdly, some schools were reticent about setting up a 
committee because of people’s normal work load. 

The ICT steering committee in one of the two post-primary schools that had such a committee 
comprised four people, while the second school had six on its committee. Each of these committees 
included a member of the school’s senior management, the school’s ICT co-ordinator, and 
representatives of the teaching staff. One school visited committed itself in its ICT plan to setting up 
an ICT planning team whose membership would comprise “representatives from teaching and 
administrative staff, students and parents.” 

In three case-study post-primary schools it was found that an ICT steering committee, or planning 
group, had been convened for the sole purpose of managing the development of an ICT plan for 
their school, and once this task had been completed the meetings of the committee ceased. One of 
these schools described itself as having an “informal ICT steering group.” In the evaluation report 
the inspector commented: 

Currently, there is an informal ICT steering group. However, the school intends to set up a formal ICT 
steering committee with representatives of all subject departments. This group will have the objectives of 
ensuring that all subject departments’ ICT needs are met, that there is effective integration of ICT in the 
classroom, that monitoring and consideration of technological developments take place and that 
monitoring and review of the ICT plan and development of the school’s ICT plan in the areas of hardware 
and software renewal are implemented. The formation of an ICT steering committee is encouraged. The 
school has developed a system of rotating the position of committee chairpersons as part of its school 
development planning process and implementation of this system with the ICT steering committee is 
acknowledged as beneficial. 

72 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
Notwithstanding the small number of schools with ICT committees, it is considered good practice to 
have such a committee. An ICT steering committee in a school can contribute to the general 
development of ICT. Furthermore, the development of an effective ICT plan becomes a shared 
process, and the remit of such a committee can go beyond the development of the plan: it can also 
include a monitoring role with regard to progress in implementing the plan. 

To maximise participation by the school and the community in ICT planning, schools—particularly 
post-primary schools and larger primary schools—should convene an ICT steering committee to 
manage the development of an ICT plan and monitor its continuous implementation. Consideration 
should be given to involving members of the board of management, parents, and the local 
community. 

4.2.2 The ICT co-ordinator 
The job of managing and co-ordinating ICT in a school was found to be the responsibility of a 
nominated co-ordinating teacher in all twenty post-primary case-study schools that were evaluated. 
Such a role for a teacher was found to be much less common in primary schools, where the task fell 
predominantly to the principal. 

The vision and enthusiasm of the primary-school principal and teachers (or, in some instances, the 
school management, comprising both the board of management and the principal) in engaging with 
ICT and developing it in their school was commended in 26 of the 32 case-study schools visited. In 
most of these schools the principal had assumed responsibility for ICT and was generally described as 
having introduced it into the school. The principals promoted its use throughout their schools and 
were described by inspectors as “keen,” “committed,” “interested,” and “enthusiastic.” It was clear 
from the reports that the success of the integration and development of ICT in schools was 
dependent very much on the vision and commitment of the principal. One report stated that 

the principal’s commitment in terms of time and effort, and his vision for infrastructural development, staff 
development and management of routine ICT issues are most commendable particularly in view of the 
many constraints identified by school personnel during the visit. 

The principals in these twenty-six schools were usually aware of the benefits to be had from using ICT 
and were generally found to be actively considering how challenges could be met. They were 
described as being open to new ideas and committed to embedding ICT in teaching and learning. 

Schools varied in the way they integrated the role of a nominated ICT co-ordinating teacher in their 
school management structure. While there was a nominated co-ordinating teacher in only a few of 
the primary case-study schools evaluated, the work carried out by such a person was usually either 
part of the duties attached to the post of responsibility of a special-duties teacher (SDT) or the sole 
duty of such a post. 

73 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
In the majority of the twenty post-primary schools visited, the role of ICT co-ordinator was attached 
to a post of responsibility, and while most of those took the form of an SDT post, a few were 
attached to an assistant principal post. In a few post-primary schools it was found that either the 
principal or the deputy principal undertook the role of ICT co-ordinator, while in a smaller number of 
schools it was found that the role of ICT co-ordinator was not part of the post of responsibility 
structure at all. Finally, in one post-primary school visited the person acting as ICT co-ordinator did 
so in a voluntary capacity. It was clear from all the evaluations, however, that there was little 
consistency among the different schools in the work load attached to posts. 

While it was found that teachers who acted as ICT co-ordinators were key players in schools’ ICT 
planning, planning duties were not the only ones attached to their role; indeed in some schools ICT 
planning constituted only a minor part of the role. In general it was found that, while the duties of 
the ICT co-ordinator were clearly defined in only a small number of schools, there was considerable 
variety in the tasks undertaken. Examples of duties attached to the role at both primary and post-
primary level included: 
• managing the development of the ICT plan and co-ordinating its implementation 
• involvement in curriculum development 
• ICT resources management, to include the auditing and purchasing of resources 
• installing software 
• system administration, maintenance, and technical support 
• liaison with subcontracted technical support 
• liaison with the NCTE and other relevant support services 
• networking issues 
• identifying training needs and facilitating staff training 
• developing relevant links with outside agencies. 

At first glance this list might suggest that ICT co-ordinators had a relatively high level of technical 
expertise. While some had, others did not have the capacity to manage and maintain modern ICT 
equipment and resources. A number of schools (as referred to in chapter 3) had external 
maintenance contractors, and frequently in those schools the ICT co-ordinator was solely 
responsible for collaborating with such contractors. 

Most of the interviews with ICT co-ordinating teachers revealed that they would like to see their role 
having a greater emphasis on pedagogy than on the area of systems administration and 
maintenance. In the main it was found that opportunities did not present themselves regularly for 
ICT co-ordinators to work with colleagues on relevant pedagogical ICT issues. Instead co-ordinators 
found a lot of their time was taken up with technical or troubleshooting issues. One co-ordinator 
spoke of the role in the following terms: 

I don’t consider myself as a formal ICT co-ordinator, but more as an IT technician and advisor. I maintain 
the IT system and network in the school; I service, repair and build computers. I install software, set up 
equipment for presentations, source quotations for new equipment and submit projects to management. 

74 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
Co-ordinators complained that this advisory or “troubleshooting” role sometimes distracted them 
from their teaching duties, especially where colleagues called on them to solve technical issues 
during teaching time. Another issue regularly reported by co-ordinators was the lack of time 
available to them for performing their duties effectively. This was noted particularly where a 
significant element of technical support was required of the co-ordinator. 

It was clear from the case-study school evaluations that the use of ICT was more efficient if 
someone in the school had direct responsibility for its management and co-ordination. Furthermore, 
efficiency was found to be optimal in those schools where the role of the co-ordinator was clearly 
defined and the relevant tasks were discharged accordingly. In this regard schools should consider 
the following duties: 
• co-ordinating the development and production of the ICT plan 
• identifying training needs and facilitating staff training 
• developing strategies for the integration of ICT throughout the curriculum 
• liaison with senior management and advising on ICT strategies 
• evaluating the use of ICT and encouraging greater use by teachers and students 
• developing a means by which the ICT infrastructure can be maintained and upgraded. 

School management personnel should ensure that their ICT co-ordinating teacher has adequate 
time to perform their duties in an effective manner. The ICT co-ordinator has a significant role to 
play in the successful integration of ICT throughout the curriculum in any school, and to achieve this 
they need to devote time to assisting their colleagues in using ICT to aid teaching and learning. They 
also need to liase with the NCTE and other relevant support services. 

ICT co-ordinators in schools would benefit from engaging with one another on a professional level, 
sharing information and learning from one another, as well as organising such activities as training 
and exhibitions. ICT co-ordinators should therefore be facilitated in setting up an association or 
network of schools’ ICT co-ordinators. 

4.2.3 The ICT plan 
An analysis of the national survey of principals found that 157 (71%) of the 220 primary principals 
who responded to the question reported that their school had a written ICT plan. At post-primary 
level 50 (46%) of the 108 principals who responded had such a plan. Furthermore, the survey 
revealed that slightly less than half (48%) of primary schools and slightly more than half (55%) of 
post-primary schools with such plans updated them at least annually. Larger schools were more 
likely to have an ICT plan and to update it regularly than smaller schools. 

Drawing up the ICT plan 

The survey of principals found that a variety of practices exist in schools with regard to the 
development of ICT plans. The survey revealed, for example, that 96% of both the primary and 

75 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
post-primary schools that had an ICT plan provided opportunities for teachers’ involvement in the 
formulation of their plans. At primary level the majority of schools (54%) reported also involving 
their board of management in the process, while fewer than half (42%) reported involving in-school 
management personnel. Some 58% of post-primary schools reported involving their board of 
management in the process, while 78% involved senior in-school management personnel. 

Parents and local businesses or community representatives were the two groups least likely to be 
involved in the development of a school’s ICT plan. Only 24% of primary and 38% of post-primary 
schools reported involving parents in the development of their plan, while 4½% of primary and 
20% of post-primary schools reported involving local businesses or their local community, or both. 

Similar personnel were found to be involved in any review of the ICT plan that took place. The 
survey found that practically all principals in the primary and post-primary schools that had an ICT 
plan reported involving teachers in any review of the plan. Some 79% of post-primary schools 
reported that senior in-school management personnel were involved in the review process, while 
48% of primary schools reported that their board of management was involved. 

The case-study school evaluations provided a greater insight into how schools develop their ICT 
plans and highlighted a number of significant issues: 
• In a small number of case-study schools the ICT planning process involved only school 

management personnel, usually a member of the school’s senior management (for example 
principal or deputy principal) and the ICT co-ordinator. It was noted in the evaluation reports for 
schools where this occurred that some teachers were unaware of the existence of an ICT plan for 
their school. 

• Teachers regularly reported during interviews that their school did provide them with 
opportunities to get involved in the development of their school’s ICT plan. This usually took the 
form of management inviting staff members to contribute their views on the plan as it went 
through its various stages of development. Many teachers, however, spoke of not availing of this 
opportunity. This was generally attributed to their lack of time or lack of knowledge of ICT plans. 

• Few schools were found to have either sought or received support from their local ICT advisor 
when developing their plan. Furthermore, while the NCTE provided seminars around the country 
for school principals on school planning for ICT, few made reference to any benefits that they 
gained from attending. 

It is clear that schools should seek the services of relevant support services to support their work in 
ICT planning. Schools also need to become more active in engaging teachers and relevant sections 
of their community in the development of their ICT plan. 

Contents of the ICT plan 

Principals of schools that had an ICT plan were asked in their national survey to state the areas that 
were addressed in their plan. Fig. 4.1 and fig. 4.2 provide details of the common areas addressed in 
the ICT plans of primary and post-primary schools, respectively. 

76 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
Fig. 4.1: Contents of ICT plans, primary schools 

What is addressed in the ICT plan? 

School vision with regard to use/importance of ICT 
Internet usage 
Access to, and use of, computers and equipment 
Resources 
Roles and responsibilities 
Support for pupils with special needs 
Hardware maintenance 
Hardware replacement 
How ICT is used to support teaching and learning 
Budget and purchasing 
Teacher training and development in ICT 
Programmes of work for individual class levels 
Assessment of pupil progress in ICT 
School website 

95% 
82% 
81% 
68% 
66% 
59% 
58% 
51% 
49% 
42% 
38% 
37% 
24% 
23% 
Base: All primary principals with an ICT plan (n=157) 
20% 40% 60% 80% 100%0% 
Fig. 4.2: Contents of ICT plans, post-primary schools 

What is addressed in the ICT plan? 

Internet usage 
School vision with regard to use and importance of ICT 
Access to, and use of, computers and equipment 
Hardware maintenance 
Hardware replacement 
Teacher training and development in ICT 
Roles and responsibilities 
Resources 
Support for students with special needs 
School website 
Budget and purchasing 
How ICT is used to support teaching and learning 
Assessment of student progress in ICT 
Programmes of work for individual class levels 

Base: All post-primary principals with an ICT plan (n=50 ) 
20% 40% 60% 80% 100%0% 
98% 
94% 
86% 
72% 
70% 
68% 
60% 
60% 
56% 
52% 
48% 
30% 
30% 
18% 
77 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
The main topics addressed in primary and post-primary ICT plans were “school vision with regard to 
the use and importance of ICT,” “internet usage,” and “access to, and use of, computers and 
equipment.” Such issues as “hardware maintenance,” “hardware replacement,” “resources” and 
“roles and responsibilities” were also common. References to “how ICT is used to support teaching 
and learning,” “programmes of work for individual class levels” and “assessment of student 
progress in ICT” did not feature prominently in plans. 

As would be expected, the contents of the ICT plans reported by principals in their survey and those 
reviewed by inspectors in case-study schools were broadly similar. Some of the plans reviewed 
included hardware and software inventories, and where these were not included inspectors 
generally recommended that they be compiled. Some schools were also advised to consider the 
possibility of using ICT to engage in collaborative projects with schools from other countries. Also, in 
contrast to the findings of the survey of principals, details of how ICT was used to facilitate teaching 
and learning featured highly in the ICT plans of the post-primary case-study schools visited. This may 
have been influenced, however, by the fact that case-study schools were notified in advance of their 
participation in the evaluation; there was evidence that certain review or upgrading work was 
undertaken in respect of some ICT plans before the visit of the inspector. 

On the whole, schools’ ICT plans concentrate more on infrastructural issues than on how ICT can be 
used to enhance teaching and learning. This is evidenced by the fact that more plans referred to 
hardware maintenance and replacement issues, to roles and responsibility issues and to access issues 
than to issues concerned with the actual use of ICT in the classroom. Only 37% of the primary 
schools surveyed and 9 of the 32 case-study primary schools evaluated, for example, included 
programmes of work for individual class levels in their ICT plans. Furthermore, less than a quarter of 
those surveyed and only four case-study schools included details of how they assessed students’ 
progress in the development of ICT skills. At post-primary level few schools included details of how 
they would assess, if at all, students’ progress in the area of ICT skills development as they moved 
from junior cycle to senior cycle. 

Furthermore, few school plans included details of the work their students were exposed to as part 
of their dedicated computer studies lessons. In effect, this meant that little or no programme 
planning existed with regard to students’ dedicated ICT lessons. In planning for dedicated ICT 
lessons, best practice was observed when ICT plans outlined the relevant aims, objectives, time 
allocations, grouping of students, course materials used, planning for students with special needs, 
teaching methods, health and safety considerations, and assessment strategies. It was also 
considered best practice when continuity and progression in work were clear from the programmes 
of work in the ICT plans. Post-primary schools should plan an appropriate curriculum for all class 
groups that are provided with dedicated ICT lessons. 

78 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
The inspectors regularly recommended to case-study schools that they review their ICT plan and in 
so doing that they recast the balance between the infrastructural and the educational focus. One 
primary school evaluation report, for example, commented: 

The school has an ICT plan which takes into account areas such as: development of the ICT facilities, 
timetabling, network, usage, assessment, teacher usage of equipment, staff development, educational 
objectives, ICT and special needs, and an ICT roadmap which outlines some of the skills which students 
are expected to acquire during their time in school. Although this list of skills is very suitable it could be 
further expanded and developed and consideration should be given to delineating at what class level 
these skills are achieved by students. 

One post-primary school report commented: 

Though the plan describes in detail the hardware and software provision that is envisaged the document 
does not deal with how ICT is to be integrated into teaching and learning. It is recommended that the 
plan be reviewed to include a strategic vision for the development of ICT and its integration in teaching 
and learning in the school. 

A school’s ICT plan should emphasise the use of ICT in teaching and learning situations. The NCTE’s 
document ICT Planning and Advice for Schools (2002) provides advice to schools on what should be 
included in an ICT plan. The planning matrix (see appendix) provides a suggested framework for the 
contents of a plan, including: ICT management and planning; ICT and the curriculum; staff 
members’ professional development; schools’ ICT culture; and ICT resources and infrastructure. 

It is recommended that schools develop their own ICT plan. The process of developing the plan 
should be a consultative one, with opportunities at post-primary level for appropriate consideration 
to be given to subject-specific needs by relevant subject departments. Relevant support documents 
should be fully used. Plans should emphasise the use of ICT in teaching and learning. To this end, 
for example, plans should include information on how ICT is used to facilitate teaching and 
learning, details of programmes of work for individual class levels, and particulars of how students’ 
progress in ICT is to be assessed. Once agreed, the plan should be brought to the attention of all 
members of the staff, and its regular monitoring and review should be implemented. This is an area 
where more extensive use could be made of the the significant expertise of ICT co-ordinators. 

4.2.4 The acceptable-use policy 
With the introduction of broadband access to schools44 and the heightened awareness of the risks 
of students having access to undesirable material on the web, the evaluation showed that there was 
a strong emphasis in schools on developing an appropriate internet AUP. 

The survey of principals revealed that more than 80% of both primary and post-primary schools had 
an AUP. While practically all AUPs in schools applied to students, the survey also showed that 80% 

44 Schools are required to certify that they have an AUP before they are connected to the schools network under the Schools Broadband 
Access Programme managed by the NCTE. 

79 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
of them at primary level and 75% at post-primary level applied also to teachers. At primary level 
57% applied to ancillary staff members, while at post-primary level the corresponding figure was 
55%. From the survey of teachers it was found that approximately 70% of primary and 63% of 
post-primary teachers were familiar with their school’s AUP. This proportion tended to increase at 
primary level with regard to those teachers with more teaching experience, while at post-primary 
level it was unexpectedly lower for schools with a low SCR. 

AUPs were prevalent in case-study schools, with almost all the schools evaluated having one. 
Inspectors’ reviews of these policies found that practically all of them covered the use of the 
internet. Few, however, referred to the health and safety risks, predominantly ergonomic in nature, 
associated with the use of computer hardware.45 It is recommended that schools have guidelines to 
cover such areas. 

Devising a policy on acceptable use of the internet is an important step in addressing the issue of 
internet safety in the school. All schools should have their own acceptable-use policy for computer 
hardware, software, and the internet. As was the case in some case-study schools, this should be 
developed in partnership with parents and should address, among other things, all the rights, 
privileges and responsibilities associated with use of the internet and on-line services. It should 
incorporate a code of conduct that should be agreed by all participants and be incorporated in the 
school’s ICT plan. The NCTE’s Internet Safety Pack (2007) and the template for developing an AUP 
on the Department’s website can act as a resource for all schools in this regard.46 The template is the 
latest version of one originally developed by the NCTE for inclusion in its publication Be Wise on the 
Net: Information and Advice for Schools (2002). 

4.3 Implementation of ICT planning 
It is important that schools do not view the development of an ICT plan as an end in itself. However, 
some schools clearly do so when they convene a team to develop a plan and then disband the team 
once the task is complete. An effective ICT plan, if implemented daily and in accordance with its 
underlying principles, will have an impact on the use and development of ICT in a school. Schools 
should ensure, however, that they have procedures for the regular monitoring and review of their 
ICT plan. There are a number of ways in which a school can do this, including (as alluded to in 
section 4.2.1) the role that an ICT steering committee can play in monitoring its progress. 

Two areas were examined to provide an accurate indication of the extent of the implementation of 
ICT planning. The first is concerned with the professional development of teachers. For example, to 
what extent were schools actively facilitating teachers in attending appropriate training that would 
allow them to integrate ICT in their classroom practice? The second area explored was the extent of 

45 There may be risks of eye strain associated with the prolonged use of monitors, as well as risks to a user’s posture from the prolonged 

use of computers. 
46 See www.education.ie for the ICT policy template, along with templates for common school policies. 

80 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
use of ICT by teachers in their lesson planning and preparation work, as well as the extent of their 
planning for the use of ICT in the teaching and learning process. Was the school’s ICT planning 
having an impact at the level of the individual teacher and classroom? 

4.3.1 Teachers’ professional development 
An analysis of the national survey of principals found that approximately 30% of primary schools 
and 57% of post-primary schools had provided at least one in-school or external ICT training course 
for their staff within the previous three years. 

Schools’ provision of ICT professional development for staff 

Fig. 4.3 shows that 17% of the 234 primary-school principals who responded to this survey 
question stated that in-school training was provided, while 16% reported that external training was 
provided within this time frame. Primary schools were found to rarely offer both in-school and 
external staff training. 

Fig. 4.3: Staff ICT training in primary schools within the previous three years 

30% 

20% 

10% 

0% 

Base: All primary principals (n=234) 

Fig. 4.4 shows that slightly more than half (51%) of the 110 post-primary principals who responded 
stated that in-school training was provided, while about a quarter (26%) stated that external 
training was provided within this time frame. 

17% 16% 
In-school External 


81 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
Fig. 4.4: Staff ICT training in post-primary schools within the previous three years 

60% 

40% 

20% 

0% 

Base: All post-primary principals (n=110) 

Schools’ ICT co-ordinators (as well as the principal in the case of primary schools) were generally 
found to facilitate any in-school training provided, and sometimes presented the training also. At 
post-primary level it was common for a member of the teaching staff to present such training. The 
NCTE and the ICT advisory service were generally found to facilitate external training in local 
education centres. Subject associations also played an important role in facilitating teachers with 
external training, especially in subject-specific software training. 

82 


51% 
26% 
In-school External 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
The survey found that a higher rate of in-school training was organised by larger schools (36% of 
primary schools with more than 200 students, compared with only 5% with fewer than 100 
students; 59% of post-primary schools with more than 400 students, compared with 41% with 
fewer than 400 students). It is likely that this is because of the higher concentration of staff 
members, and therefore possible participants, in the larger schools. However, it is possible for small 
schools to work together in groups to organise specific training for their staff members. In the case 
of external training the survey showed no notable difference in the rate of provision between school 
type, sector or size at either the primary or the post-primary level. 

The type of ICT professional development courses attended by teachers 

The extent of teachers’ attendance at ICT professional development courses was garnered from the 
national survey of teachers. They were asked to state, from a list provided, what courses organised 
by the NCTE or ICT advisory service they had attended. Table 4.1 reveals some patterns in relation to 
attendance at these courses. 

Table 4.1: Teachers’ attendance at NCTE and ICT advisory service training courses 

Course Primary teachers Post-primary teachers 
Primary phase 1 34.2% 65% 
Primary phase 2 27% 50.3% 
Basic troubleshooting 13.7% 8.8% 
Computer networking 4.4% 7.5% 
Introduction to digital media 22.6% 7.8% 
Digital video for learning 6.5% 2.1% 
Empowering minds: using control technologies 2.3% 1.1% 
Internet and e-mail for learning 24.5% 13.1% 
Web site design and development for learning 14.8% 8.8% 
Intel “Teach to the Future” 20.3% 20.6% 
Support groups 5.7% 3.2% 
ICT and special needs: the basics 12% 4% 
ICT and special needs: learning support 5.7% 2.9% 
ICT and special needs: mild GLD 1.1% 0.5% 
ICT and special needs: moderate, severe or profound GLD 0.4% 0.3% 
ICT and special needs: deaf or hard of hearing 0 0 
ICT and special needs:visual impairment 0.2% 0 
ICT and special needs: autistic-spectrum disorders 0.4% 0.3% 
ICT and Geography 5.1% 
ICT and Mathematics 7.2% 
ICT and Science 5.9% 
ICT and Guidance 1.9% 
Other (e.g. ECDL) 21.1% 5.1% 

83 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
It is clear from the responses and from discussions with teachers in case-study schools that many 
felt they had benefited from phase I and II training associated with IT 2000. Table 4.1 also shows 
that generic programmes of professional development (for example IT 2000 phase I and II, Intel 
“Teach to the Future”) tend to attract a greater take-up among teachers than those dealing with 
particular topics or specific subjects. This is presumably due in large part to the fact that generic 
courses have an appeal throughout the teaching profession, while topic or subject-specific courses 
are relevant to defined groups within the profession. 

While teachers in case-study schools reported during interviews that they had attended professional 
development courses provided by relevant support services, a substantial proportion stated that they 
had received limited training during these courses in how to actually integrate ICT in their teaching. 
While it is understood that such training is an integral part of current professional development 
programmes, it is recommended that greater attention be paid to this area in the future. 

Training methods associated with ICT professional development courses 

Primary teachers reported that their preferred training method was a school-based course. Almost 
four out of five teachers (79%) of the 1,162 respondents rated this method in their top three 
choices. This method was popular primarily because the training in these settings generally makes 
use only of equipment and resources that are readily available to the teachers. 

84 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
Post-primary teachers reported that their preferred training method was a tutor-led course (or face-
to-face training) in their local education centre. Nearly three out of four post-primary teachers (73%) 
of the 800 respondents rated this method in their top three choices. The second choice for primary 
teachers was tutor-led courses in an education centre (74%), whereas at post-primary level it was 
the school-based course (69%). The third most popular method for all teachers was a tutor-
facilitated ICT support group in the education centre. This finding is particularly important from the 
viewpoint of the school management: when organising ICT training for staff members, the 
management should be aware of teachers’ preferred training methods. 

Some issues arose, particularly during interviews with teachers at post-primary level, regarding the 
courses provided in education centres. Many teachers expressed dissatisfaction with the fact that 
the majority of these courses took place outside normal school hours, and many spoke of having to 
travel long distances to attend them. Others also mentioned that there was a distinct lack of 
“joined-up-thinking” or progression regarding the courses they attended or were offered. A further 
issue concerned the wide range of abilities and experiences commonly found in groups of teachers 
attending training courses. Given the varied levels of proficiency of teachers in ICT, however, it is 
accepted that this is an issue that will inevitably arise. Nevertheless it is recommended that course 
organisers and presenters take appropriate steps to minimise its impact on the learning experience 
of the teachers attending a course. 

Teachers’ further ICT professional development needs 

In their survey, principals were asked to specify the areas in which they considered teacher training 
to be necessary to further facilitate effective teaching and learning in the classroom. In their 
questionnaire teachers were asked separately to state what they felt were their personal 
requirements for further professional development. Fig. 4.5 and fig. 4.6 show the responses 
received from primary and post-primary principals and teachers in relation to teacher education 
needs regarding effective classroom practice.47 In general, the findings suggest that greater 
communication between principals and teachers regarding the content, and indeed the mode, of 
ICT professional development would benefit teachers. The evaluation found considerable divergence 
between the views of principals and teachers regarding the extent and nature of the professional 
development needs of teachers. Furthermore, it would appear from the findings that principals 
perceive teachers to have somewhat greater training needs than do the teachers themselves. This is 
not to suggest, however, that teachers do not have a strong awareness of their training needs. 

47 Although the wording of the priorities in the questionnaire for principals was not exactly the same as that in the questionnaire for 
teachers, similar items were matched (where possible) between the questionnaires. 

85 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
Fig. 4.5: Principals’ and teachers’ views on ICT training requirements, primary schools 

Priorities for further professional development 
[Principals and teachers] 

Digital imaging/peripherals 
Computer troubleshooting 
Subject-specific use of ICT/software 
Developing a school website 
ICT and special educational needs 
Computer networking 
Use of Internet / email in teaching and learning 
Software specific (in classroom) 
Project-based learning 
Internet safety 

20% 40% 60% 80%0% 
77% 
58% 
66% 
41% 
60% 
37% 
59% 
41% 
53% 
44% 
53% 
40% 
50% 
59% 
40% 
71% 
43% 
n/a 
n/a 
38% 
Principal 

Teacher 

Base: All primary principals (n=234) and teachers (n=1162) 

Primary-school principals identified further professional development needs for their teaching staff 
in most items (especially the use of digital imaging and peripherals), while teachers were more 
interested in the software-specific use of ICT in the classroom. Recent changes to the primary 
curriculum, coupled with the work of the PCSP, could be contributing to this perceived further 
training need of teachers. 

86 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
Fig. 4.6: Principals’ and teachers’ views on ICT training requirements, post-primary schools 

Priorities for further professional development 
[Principals and teachers] 

Subject-specific use of ICT 

ICT and special educational needs 

Peripherals, e.g. digital camera 

Computer troubleshooting 

Internet/email 

Software specific (in classroom) 

Computer networking 

School website 

Project-based learning 

Internet safety 

25% 50% 75% 100%0% 
94% 
62% 
81% 
25% 
77% 
48% 
68% 
34% 
52% 
64% 
45% 
78% 
44% 
31% 
44% 
22% 
37% 
35% 
n/a 
n/a 
Principal 

Teacher 

Base: All post-primary principals (n=110) and teachers (n=800) 

Almost all post-primary principals (94%) reported that teachers required training in the subject-
specific use of ICT, while this area of training was given priority by fewer than two-thirds of teachers 
(62%). Conversely, more than three-quarters of teachers (78%) reported a need for training in the 
use of specific software in the classroom, while fewer than half the principals (45%) chose this area. 

Table 4.2 shows the further ICT professional development preferences of post-primary teachers by 
subject. It can be seen that teachers of Irish, foreign languages and the social studies I and II groups 
of subjects were most likely to select further professional development in the classroom use of 
educational software. These teachers, along with teachers of English, were also slightly more likely 
to select professional development in using the internet in teaching and learning, in using standard 
applications, and in project-based learning. This finding could be influenced by the fact that a 
number of these subjects (for example, History and Geography) require access to sources of 
information that are most readily available electronically, and that teachers of these subjects would 
like to be in a position to obtain this kind of information more easily. Recent changes to syllabuses, 
along with the work of relevant subject support services in schools, could be contributing to this 
perceived need for further training. The findings also show that there is scope for subject 
associations to organise or provide subject-specific professional development courses for teachers. 

87 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
Table 4.2: Professional development preferences of post-primary teachers, by subject 

% of subject teachers who opted for further professional development in the particular area 

EnglishMathematicsIrishForeign LanguagesScienceBusiness StudiesApplied ScienceSocial Studies ISocial Studies IITotal 

Classroom use of 
educational software 74 72 85 83 65 73 74 79 82 75 
Classroom use of 
standard applications 
(e.g. desktop 
publishing, 
spreadsheets) 49 37 55 49 41 51 39 48 52 44 
Computer networking 28 34 28 31 38 27 31 28 28 30 
Computer 
troubleshooting 37 33 29 24 42 27 41 35 32 33 
Developing a school 
web site 19 27 19 21 26 29 22 19 25 22 
Digital imaging (e.g. 
digital cameras, 
digital video) 41 45 49 40 50 52 55 50 51 48 
ICT and special 
educational needs 27 27 27 27 21 22 21 28 26 25 
Internet safety 29 32 38 37 30 38 29 34 40 34 
Project-based learning 44 30 46 37 37 30 42 42 42 37 
Subject-specific use 
of ICT 64 64 67 74 65 64 54 63 62 63 
Using the internet in 
teaching and learning 74 56 70 75 65 60 54 67 69 64 

Good practice regarding teachers’ ICT professional development 

The quality of a school’s efforts to cater for the ICT training needs of its teaching staff was singled 
out by inspectors as being effective in less than half the primary case-study schools visited and in 
only a quarter of those post-primary schools evaluated. The use of the word “effective” in reports 
usually meant that a school had plans to provide its teaching staff with appropriate training and that 
those plans were being realised, or that it was actively developing training plans for staff members. 
The identification of the training needs of teachers in the use of ICT also featured strongly in whole-
school planning in these schools, as is appropriate. It was also usually noted in reports from these 
schools that teachers had engaged at some level with various professional development courses in 
ICT. One primary inspection report stated: 

88 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
All staff members have had a reasonable level of basic skills training, with some staff [members] currently 
participating in ICT courses emphasising the integration of ICT in the curriculum. Four teachers have 
undertaken on-line in-service courses on issues regarding special educational needs in the last term. 

One post-primary school inspection report commented: 

This training included NCTE Phase 1 and Phase 2 education courses, VEC night classes, European 
Computer Driving Licence (ECDL) courses, Joint Examining Board certification and Intel Teach to the 
Future courses. 

It was common in these reports to read phrases such as “There was a good level of expertise among 
staff” or “Teachers were eager to engage in further training.” It was frequently reported that 
teachers in these schools regularly shared their ICT skills, expertise and experience with each other. 
Some schools even provided ICT training for parents. Mention was also usually made of the 
commitment displayed by teachers in attending professional development courses, which usually 
took place after school hours. 

In the remaining case-study schools visited inspectors generally recommended that efforts be 
directed towards catering for the training needs of the teaching staff, particularly training that 
would allow them to better integrate ICT in their classroom practice. In particular, schools were 
advised: 
• to implement training plans that existed, or consider short on-site training courses 
• to review the ICT training needs of their staff members and develop appropriate training plans 

for them 
• to monitor the training needs of staff members 
• to concentrate on the integration of ICT in teaching and learning in any training provided 
• to use the expertise already available among staff members, and even among students 
• to liaise with the ICT advisor in their local education centre with a view to seeking assistance in 

developing and running ICT training courses for staff members; schools were also asked to 

consider liaison with other support personnel 
• to include references to professional development plans in the ICT plan for their school 
• to develop a mentor system, whereby experienced teachers could assist teachers who were 

unfamiliar with the technology. 

Teachers in case-study schools generally reported that the ICT professional development courses 
they attended had an effect on the extent of their use of ICT during teaching. While it is difficult to 
pinpoint the level of this influence, it was interesting to note that when asked to state what factors 
facilitated the development of ICT in their classrooms, teachers nearly always mentioned their 
attendance at relevant professional development courses. 

89 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
4.3.2 Using ICT in classroom and lesson planning and preparation 
From interviews with individual mainstream teachers and special-education teachers in primary 
schools, the inspectors found that more than two-thirds (69%) of mainstream teachers and 61% of 
special-education teachers reported using ICT to plan and prepare for their teaching. Interestingly, 
teachers in primary schools with a higher SCR were slightly more likely to use ICT to plan (78%) 
than teachers in schools with a low SCR (65%).48 In post-primary schools, inspectors found that 
nearly four out of five subject teachers (79%) reported that they used ICT when preparing their 
lessons. 

The way in which teachers used ICT in their lesson planning and preparation was explored in some 
detail through the survey of teachers and the case-study school evaluation reports. One area of 
interest was the extent of teachers’ use of computers and applications as part of their planning and 
preparation work. An emphasis was also placed on examining whether teachers used internet 
resources when preparing lessons. Particular attention was given to teachers’ use of the Scoilnet 
web site, the education portal developed and maintained by the NCTE.49 

Use of computers in lesson planning and preparation 

Teachers were asked in their national survey how frequently they used computers for lesson 
preparation. This could be for creating templates or producing students’ worksheets, hand-outs, 
revision notes, or similar resources. As illustrated in fig. 4.7, 82% of primary and 78% of post-
primary respondents reported using computers for this purpose, though at different frequencies. 

Fig. 4.7: Use of computers for lesson preparation 


a month a month 

Primary teachers 

Post-primary teachers 

Base: 1,162 primary and 800 post-primary teachers 

48 See note 19 (chapter 2) for a definition of SCR. 

49 Scoilnet, according to the NCTE web site (September 2006), is one of the most popular sites devoted to facilitating the work of 
education professionals. The site was launched in 1998 and is managed by the NCTE. It actively promotes the integration of ICT in 
teaching and learning by making resources available for downloading, such as lesson plans, interactive and printable worksheets, 
notes, and multimedia resources. The learning materials for pupils available from the site are curriculum-focused and are selected and 
reviewed by curriculum specialists and teachers. 

90 


50% 
40% 
30% 
20% 
10% 
0% 
At least once a week About 2/3 times Less than twice Never 
40% 40% 
20% 20% 21% 21%
18% 19% 

ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
The use of the computer for lesson preparation was realated the teacher’s age. Of those under 
thirty-five, 90% of primary teachers and 92% of post-primary teachers reported using computers 
for preparation purposes, compared with 71% (primary) and 68% (post-primary) of teachers over 
forty-five. 

The post-primary survey showed that teachers in schools with a low SCR were more likely to use 
computers for lesson preparation (84%). It would be reasonable to assume that this was because of 
the higher number of computers available for use. While there was little variation in the level of 
computer use in preparation for teaching and learning in different subject areas, it was found that a 
lower than average proportion of teachers of Irish reported using computers for this purpose. 

Fig. 4.8 gives an indication of the type of resources that primary teachers generate as a result of 
their use of computers for lesson planning and preparation. It provides details of the responses 
received from the 104 mainstream primary teachers who reported during interviews with inspectors 
that they used ICT to provide resources for teaching. Interestingly, those interviews found that 
teachers in schools with a higher SCR were slightly more likely to use ICT to provide resources or 
aids for their teaching (89%) than teachers in schools with a low SCR (78%). 

Fig. 4.8: Resources provided by mainstream primary teachers using ICT 

Workcards Flashcards Charts Powerpoint Web/internet 
presentation/graphics 

Base: All mainstream class teachers using ICT to provide resources for teaching (n=104) 

The reasons why teachers used these resources are varied and consistent with good practice: 
• to reinforce existing teaching and learning methods (especially for teachers in schools with a high 
SCR) 
• to improve the teaching and learning of specific curriculum areas (especially for teachers of senior 
classes) 

91 


80% 
60% 
40% 
20% 
0% 
56% 
47% 
27% 
16% 
9% 

ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
• to improve literacy, reading and writing skills (especially for teachers of junior classes) 

• to introduce more visual and interactive aspects into lessons (especially for teachers in schools 
with a low SCR). 

Computers were found to be used by teachers in their classroom or lesson planning and preparation 
work in most of the fifty-two case-study schools evaluated, even in those schools where the teacher 
may not have been included in ICT planning at the school level (as discussed in section 4.2.3). The 
use of computers for such work in these schools was generally found to be a matter for individual 
teachers. One post-primary report stated: 

At a classroom level it is a matter for individual teachers to plan for the use of ICT in lessons and from 
discussions with a small group of teachers it was clear that planning for use of, as well as actual usage of, 
ICT in teaching is uniformly strong. This is facilitated by the existence of ICT hardware and software in 
certain classrooms. 

The use of computers for lesson planning and preparation in the case-study schools, however, was 
found to vary considerably. At post-primary level in particular their application varied according to 
the subject being taught. In one primary school it was noted that while each teacher had a copy of 
their school’s ICT plan, “there was little evidence to suggest that the ICT plan impacted on individual 
teachers’ planning or that teachers plan formally for the use of ICT.” However, a more typical report 
was as follows: 

[Teachers] wished to further expand their skills in order to become more au fait with the hardware in 
order to make active use of ICT during lessons. Teachers . . . noted [that] technical difficulties, while using 
ICT equipment, were a major problem for them and resulted in a negative outlook towards the whole ICT 
area and their willingness to use the technology. 

Practically all twenty case-study post-primary school evaluation reports referred to the fact that 
“teachers reported using ICT for class preparation, including use of the internet as a resource,” or at 
worst that “teachers’ use of ICT in planning or preparation for their teaching was mixed,” or that 
“planning for [the] use of, as well as actual usage of, ICT in teaching occurs at varying levels.” 

The use of ICT in planning for teaching in special education or learning support was particularly 
prevalent in case-study primary schools, and this was considered good practice. Inspectors 
recommended in many instances that such good practice be replicated throughout mainstream 
teaching settings. 

Internet resources 

In their survey, teachers were asked about the use they made of internet resources in their lesson 
planning and preparation. Table 4.3 shows that 69% of both primary and post-primary teachers 
reported making use of such resources. 

92 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
Table 4.3: Teachers’ use of internet resources in planning and preparation for teaching 

Internet resources 
Age Gender SCR Total 
Under 35 35–45 Over 45 Male Female Low High 
Proportion of primary teachers 
answering yes to using internet 
resources in planning and 
preparing for teaching 

82% 

63% 

47% 

68% 

69% 

71% 

67% 

69% 
n (primary) 

569 

270 

281 

155 

893 

533 

534 

1,162 
Proportion of post-primary 
teachers answering yes 
to using internet resources 
in planning and preparing 
for teaching 

83% 

65% 

59% 

68% 

70% 

67% 

73% 

69% 
n (post-primary) 

272 

210 

290 

260 

468 

323 

321 

800 

The survey found that there was a strong correlation between internet use and age: younger 
teachers were more likely to make use of internet resources than those over thirty-five. It can be 
assumed that this was partly influenced by their exposure to the benefits of ICT during their teacher 
training experience. A higher level of use was also associated with those teachers who had 
computer facilities and internet access in their own classrooms. At primary level the survey also 
showed that teachers of senior classes were slightly more likely to use internet resources in planning 
for teaching (74%) than teachers of junior classes (69%). At post-primary level some differences 
emerged in the use of the internet by teachers for planning and preparation purposes in different 
subjects, as shown in fig. 4.9. 

Fig. 4.9: Use of the internet in planning and preparation for teaching, by subject 

Studies I Studies II Languages Science Studies 

100% 
80% 
60% 
40% 
20% 
0% 
Social Social English Foreign Science Applied Maths Business Irish 
78% 76% 74% 73% 73% 
68% 
63% 62% 
54% 
Base: All post-primary teachers (n=800) 

93 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
A relatively low proportion (54%) of teachers of Irish reported using the internet in planning and 
preparation for teaching, compared with teachers of social studies I and II subjects (78–76%) and 
English (74%). 

Case-study school evaluations found considerable use of the internet by teachers in their planning 
work. They generally used it as a means of “accessing planning resources and ideas which served as 
a stimulus for students.” For example, teachers used the internet to find planning and progress 
record templates and suggestions for teaching activities. Teachers also mentioned, however, that 
significant time and work was required to identify, find or generate appropriate materials. 

Scoilnet 

The survey found that relatively high proportions of teachers use Scoilnet, with some 77% and 67% 
of primary and post-primary teachers, respectively, reporting that they had visited the site within the 
previous two years. Use was found to be slightly higher for teachers under thirty-five. While the level 
of use was similar for primary teachers of both junior and senior classes, the survey showed that 
there were differences in use by post-primary teachers among the subjects taught. A higher 
proportion of teachers of the social studies I and II (75–72%) and science subjects (74%), for 
example, reported making use of the site than teachers of the applied science subjects (60%), Irish 
(63%), and Business Studies (62%). 

In general, however, teachers may be considered as infrequent users of the Scoilnet web site. As can 
be seen from fig. 4.10, some 63% of primary teachers and 62% of post-primary teachers who used 
the site stated that they had visited it less than twice a month in the previous two years. 

Fig. 4.10: Scoilnet visits by teachers 

How frequently do you access 
Scoilnet? 

At least once a week About 2/3 times a month Less than twice a month 


Primary 

Post-primary 

Base: All primary (n=859) and post-primary (n=532) teachers who used Scoilnet during the last two years 

7% 
10% 
30% 28% 
63% 62% 
0% 
20% 
40% 
60% 
80% 
94 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
96% 94% 
14% 
56% 
22% 
9% 
16% 
10% 4% 4% 
1% 1% 
0% 
20% 
40% 
60% 
80% 
100% 
The teachers’ resources area of Scoilnet was very popular, with more than 90% of both primary and 
post-primary respondents who stated that they had visited the site reporting that they had visited 
this section. This would suggest not only that significant numbers of teachers are already using ICT 
to help them with their lesson planning and preparation work but also that significant numbers are 
keen to vary their teaching resources and to explore new ways of engaging students in lessons. All 
other areas of Scoilnet (except perhaps the post-primary students’ section) proved to be much less 
popular, as can be seen from fig. 4.11. 

Fig. 4.11: The most popular sections of Scoilnet among teachers 

What parts of Scoilnet do you visit? 

Teachers’ Student areas Special needs Schools on-line Parents’ Other 
resources (e.g., exam information 
centre)


Primary 

Post-primary 

Base: All primary (n=859) and post-primary (n=532) teachers who used Scoilnet during the last two years 

In general, Scoilnet achieved high ratings from those who visited it. Fig. 4.12 shows that 82% of the 
858 primary teachers and 67% of the 531 post-primary teachers who rated the site stated that the 
quality of the site’s content was either “good” or “very good.” Furthermore, 78% and 61% of 
primary and post-primary teachers, respectively, rated the relevance of materials to their work or 
interests as “good” or “very good.” Teachers of Mathematics and English at post-primary level 
rated Scoilnet more positively, while teachers of the applied science subjects rated it less positively. 
These teachers expressed disappointment with the relevance to their subject areas of the materials 
available on the site. 

95 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
Fig. 4.12: Teachers’ ratings of Scoilnet 

How do you rate certain elements of Scoilnet? 

[% Good or Very Good] 

Ease of finding relevant Organisation of Quality of the Relevance of materials 
information information content to your work/interests 


Primary 

Post-Primary 

Base: All primary (n=858) and post-primary (n=531) teachers who used Scoilnet during the last two years 

Teachers were of the view that teaching resources (for example lesson plans and class activities) and 
learning resources and materials for use by students were important content items for Scoilnet. Fig. 

4.13 provides details of the level of importance teachers attached to a range of content types. 
81% 
75% 
85% 
76% 
82% 
67% 
78% 
61% 
0% 
20% 
40% 
60% 
80% 
100% 
96 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
Fig. 4.13: Teachers’ views on what Scoilnet should contain 

Top three most important content types 


Teaching resources (e.g., lesson plans, class activities) 
Learning resources/materials for students 
Professional development information 
Educational news and current events 
Educational research 
Academic exchange or discussion 
Job vacancies 

0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 
95% 
88% 
90% 
92% 
45% 
38% 
34% 
33% 
18% 
27% 
17% 
26% 
5% 
4% 
Primary 

Post-primary 

Base: All primary teachers (n=1162) and post-primary (n=800) 

Teachers regarded class-planning materials (for example lesson plans and guidelines) as the most 
important type of teaching resource that Scoilnet should provide. Other teaching resources 
mentioned by primary teachers were assessment materials, classroom management information, 
and project ideas. The majority of other teaching resources mentioned by post-primary teachers 
were related to examinations (for example revision notes and activities, and marking schemes) and 
reviews of educational web sites (by subject). A low level of interest was shown in teacher-only 
forums as a teaching resource. 

In general, the findings suggest that teachers are partial to using the internet to help them with 
their lesson preparation work, and that Scoilnet, and other such web sites, can act as a very helpful 
resource in this respect. It is equally clear, however, that a significant proportion of teachers do not 
exploit the benefits of the internet in preparing for their lessons. These include teachers over thirty-
five, teachers who do not have ready access to appropriate ICT facilities, and teachers (at post-
primary level) of certain subjects. Furthermore, of those who make use of the internet, for example 
for visiting such web sites as Scoilnet, their use is infrequent. It is clear that there is significant scope 
for the further development of the use of ICT in the area of lesson preparation. The continued 
efforts of schools at providing teachers with appropriate access to computers and the internet are 
considered good practice. It is also clear that teachers would like to see more teaching and learning 
resources being made available for downloading, and this is perhaps an area that could be reviewed 
by the NCTE. 

97 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
4.3.3 Planning for using ICT in teaching and learning 
While the use of ICT in planning for teaching and learning was prevalent in most case-study schools, 
planning for the actual use of ICT in the teaching and learning process was not universal, 
particularly in primary schools.50 Where it did occur at post-primary level it was generally confined to 
a small group of subjects. 

Inspectors reported frequently in the inspection reports on case-study primary schools that 
“individual teachers do not generally plan formally for the use of ICT in their classrooms,” or at best 
that “planning for [the] use of ICT appears to be incidental rather than formal.” There were a 
number of reasons for this particular lack of planning, not least being the lack of ICT facilities in 
classrooms or the lack of the ICT skills needed by teachers to integrate the technology effectively in 
their classroom practice. One report, for example, noted: 

ICT is rarely mentioned in the lesson plans in terms of a discrete subject area or for skills development. ICT 
is more likely to appear in teachers’ lesson plans by way of reference to various software packages 
[applications] that support teaching and learning, including those that come with a textbook. It was 
indicated by the teachers interviewed that teachers’ knowledge and confidence in using ICT greatly 
influences the extent to which ICT features in their written preparation and the degree to which they use 
ICT in the classroom. 

At post-primary level, inspectors commented regularly in a positive way on the extent of planning 
for the use of ICT in teaching and learning, but only in the case of certain subject areas. This was 
particularly strong among teachers of the science and applied science subjects and guidance 
counsellors. In one evaluation report it was mentioned that 

in addition to having an input into the school’s ICT plan the teachers interviewed stated that they also 
planned for the use of ICT in their own classes. In this context the use of the internet as a source of 
animations, word processing to produce worksheets and CAD software were mentioned as resources, 
while reference was also made to the use of [careers software] with students. 

In another post-primary school report reference was made to the fact that “informal training and 
collaboration is ongoing between teachers who plan for the use of ICT in their lessons,” and that 
“some of these work across subject divisions.” 

It was also noted in case-study post-primary school evaluation reports that Transition Year, the LCVP 
and the LCA programme all encouraged increased planning for the use of ICT in teaching and 
learning. 

Where limited planning for the actual use of ICT in teaching and learning was observed in schools, 
both primary and post-primary, it was common for inspectors to recommend that this area be 
developed. One primary school evaluation report stated: 

50 For example, only 43 % of the 127 mainstream teachers interviewed by inspectors during their visits to 77 schools reported that their 
planning showed how they intended to use ICT in their teaching. This compares with 69 % who reported that they used ICT to plan 
and prepare for teaching. In the case of the 71 members of special-education support teams interviewed, 57 % stated that their 
planning showed how they intended to use ICT in their teaching. This compares with 61 % who reported that they used ICT to plan 
and prepare for teaching. 

98 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
Teachers reported that personal long-term and short-term planning does not include references to how it 
is intended using ICT to assist the teaching and learning process in the classes. This is an area that the 
teachers should include in future planning. As the number of students is small and the ratio of students 
to computers is generous (two students to one computer in the junior room and five students to one 
computer in the senior room) there is scope for the teachers to promote the use of ICT across a wide 
range of curricular areas using programmes tailored to meet the individual learning needs of the 
students. 

Evaluation reports suggest that where there was ease of access to ICT hardware and software in 
classrooms more frequent use was made of these resources in teaching and learning. It was also 
clear from post-primary evaluation reports that teachers were more likely to use ICT in the teaching 
and learning of those subjects in which there was recent syllabus revision and consequent in-service 
support training. The use of the internet, word-processing programs and CDs distributed during in-
service courses was frequently described. Teachers in the different case-study schools also reported 
that significant time and work were required to identify, find or generate appropriate subject-
specific teaching and learning materials. 

The fact that more teachers use ICT in their planning than plan for the actual use of ICT in their 
teaching suggests that teachers would benefit from training in teaching methods that incorporate 
ICT. This is an area where the NCTE and the relevant support services could assist schools, but it is 
also an area in which the ICT co-ordinator (or teachers who use ICT competently) can play a role. 

4.4 Forward planning 
The national surveys of both principals and teachers asked respondents to state what priorities they 
had identified with respect to the development of ICT in their school (in the case of principals) and 
their classrooms or subjects (in the case of teachers). The responses give an insight into the thinking 
and strategic planning in schools as they move into a future where students’ daily environment 
outside school becomes increasingly dominated by computing technology. 

4.4.1 Principals’ priorities for ICT development 
Through their questionnaire (and the case-study school evaluations) principals identified the 
following issues as important in relation to the development of ICT in their schools: 
• the upgrade and maintenance of existing hardware (primary and post-primary) 
• the integration of ICT in the curriculum (primary and post-primary) 
• the provision of teacher training in ICT (primary and post-primary) 
• the upgrade or provision of internet access and web site presence (primary). 

Tables 4.4 and 4.5 provide samples of comments made by school principals in relation to their 
priorities for ICT development. When these are examined they give a good insight into the range of 
priorities that exist in schools, and into the commitment and far-sightedness of principals. 

99 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
Table 4.4: Primary principals’ views on the strategic development of ICT 

School type and size Comment from principal regarding priorities for development 
Co-educational, large (200+) Broadband; restoration of server after building work; refresher courses for teachers. 
Co-educational, medium (100-199) Computer for each teacher; broadband; school web site. 
Co-educational, large (200+) Encourage teachers to obtain and use material in a more structured way; encourage 
use of internet as a classroom tool, teachers’ familiarity with IT. 
Co-educational, large (200+) Evaluation of current practices and procedures; provision of second computer to 
each classroom; further development of school web site. 
Co-educational, medium (100-199) Expand current provision to upgrade or replace some existing equipment; 
maintenance; networking and broadband completion; web site. 
Co-educational, medium (100-199) In-school in-service day; review ICT plan; update computers; networking; mobile 
projector. 
Co-educational, large (200+) Integration of ICT in various aspects of curriculum; provision of computer in each 
room. 
Co-educational, large (200+) More computers in classrooms; further integration of peripherals; broadband; 
networking; acquire digital projector; integrate ICT in curriculum. 
Co-educational, large (200+) One teacher with responsibility for ICT room; ICT curriculum; web site; maintenance. 
Single-sex, large (200+) Review general plan; acceptable-use policy; up-skilling; encourage greater use by 
all. 
Co-educational, small Staff training; broadband; networking; hardware replacement; support for special(
fewer than 100) needs students. 
Single-sex, large (200+) Teachers’ skills; purchase of suitable software; timetabling of use of computer room. 
Single-sex, medium (100-199) Regular use of computer room; use of data projector as teaching tool; provision of 
laptop for each teacher. 
Co-educational, large (200+) Up-skilling of teachers; make more use of what’s available. 

Table 4.5: Post-primary principals’ views on the strategic development of ICT 

School type and size Comment from principal regarding priorities for development 
Vocational co-educational, Greater use of ICT when teaching subjects not specifically related to ICT; increased 
large (600+) use of ICT as a teaching aid for special-needs students; provision of ICT facilities in 
every teaching area; expansion of ICT facilities in the school library. 
Secondary co-educational, Development of acceptable-use policy; access to, and use of, computers and 
medium (400–599) equipment; details of how ICT can be used to facilitate teaching and learning. 
Secondary single-sex, Extend the network to all classrooms; provision of internet access in each classroom; 
medium (400–599) further computers needed and another computer room. 
Secondary single-sex, large (600+) Promote use of the school’s network (wired and wireless) by staff members; upgrade 
ICT skill levels of staff members; improve access to ICT facilities for all students; 
provide laptop computers to staff members and data projectors for each classroom. 
Secondary single-sex, small ICT support for students with special educational needs; in-service training for 
(fewer than 400) teachers using ICT in subject planning and classroom teaching; technical support 
in-service training; time and resources a continuing requirement. 

100 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
Secondary single-sex, small 

Integration in teaching and learning; extension of community access to ICT 
(fewer than 400) 

facilities; hardware replacement and maintenance. 
Secondary single-sex, medium 

Increased access to ICT facilities for all students; increased use of ICT by all 
(400-599) 

teachers throughout the curriculum; provision of training on site and continuous for 
staff members; making use of ICT the norm rather than for special events. 
Secondary, co-educational, large 

Greater use of ICT in the classroom as part of teaching and learning; provision of 
(600+) 

training and awareness for staff members; drafting of ICT policy; making larger 
number of computers available in classrooms and other teaching areas. 
Secondary co-educational, small 

Structure ICT courses so that each year group receives certification from an 
(fewer than 400) 

appropriate certification body at progressive levels as students’ progress through 
school; connection of broadband and networking of as many classrooms as possible; 
professional development of teachers. 

Community co-educational, large 

Maintenance, access, software, administration; provision of hardware towards 
(600+) 

enhanced teaching and learning environment in classrooms. 
Secondary co-educational, large 

Upgrading hardware; teacher training; installing broadband; integrating computers 
(600+) 

in subject programme areas; finalising a written ICT plan. 

4.4.2 Teachers’ priorities for ICT development 
Through their survey (and through interviews in case-study schools) teachers identified the following 
issues as important to them in relation to the development of ICT in their teaching: 

• the provision of ICT in their classroom: hardware, software, broadband internet access (primary 

and post-primary) 
• teacher training in ICT (primary and post-primary) 
• updating of specific software, particularly for recently qualified teachers (primary) 
• timetabling of ICT lessons (primary). 

Table 4.6 outlines the priority areas identified by the 844 primary and 571 post-primary teachers 
who gave a response to this question. 

101 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
Table 4.6: Teachers’ priority areas for the development of ICT 

Priority Area Number of respondents reporting Proportion of respondents 
this area to be a priority 
Primary Post-primary Primary Post-primary 
Teacher training in ICT 170 80 20.1% 14% 
Improved use of resources in teaching 154 34 18.2% 6% 
Update or obtain (appropriate) software 153 82 18.1% 14.4% 
Hardware or equipment 150 110 17.8% 19.3% 
Integration of ICT in curriculum 127 26 15% 4.5% 
Personal skill development 119 21 14.1% 3.6% 
Teach ICT to students 106 5 12.6% 0.8% 
Improved planning or timetabling 91 14 10.8% 2.5% 
Internet 72 56 8.5% 9.8% 
Facilitate access to ICT, especially in classroom 47 50 5.6% 8.8% 
Information on or reviews of ICT 44 14 5.2% 2.5% 
IT support 43 2 5.1% 0.4% 
Provide or update computer room (primary) 18 15 2.1% 2.5% 
Give access to computer room (post-primary) 
The main priorities of principals were infrastructural in nature, while teachers were more concerned 
with being able to effectively integrate ICT in their teaching. It is also encouraging to see that 
principals and teachers share some of the priorities identified regarding the development of ICT in 
schools, that is, the upgrading of equipment and professional development training. 

4.5 Findings and recommendations 
4.5.1 Main findings 
ICT co-ordination in schools 

• The responsibility for ICT in primary schools can lie with an ICT steering committee, the principal, 
the deputy principal, an ICT co-ordinator, or a combination of these personnel. At the post-
primary level it usually lies with the ICT co-ordinator; all case-study schools had an ICT coordinator. 
ICT steering committees are not prevalent in schools. 

• The evaluation found that greater efficiency was achieved where a named person had the 
responsibility for ICT within a school, and where their role was clearly defined. The duties of the 
ICT co-ordinator were not always clearly defined. 

• Few ICT co-ordinators had opportunities to work with colleagues regarding relevant ICT 
pedagogical issues. 

102 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
• The vision and commitment of the principal contributes significantly to the successful integration 
and development of ICT throughout the curriculum. 

The ICT plan and the AUP 

• The majority of primary schools (71% of survey respondents) have a written ICT plan, while 
fewer than half of post-primary schools (46%) reported having such a plan. 

• The ICT plans tend to concentrate on hardware issues and their organisation rather than on how 
ICT can be used in the teaching and learning context. 

• In those schools that engage in ICT planning there is a greater emphasis on whole-school ICT 
planning than planning for ICT by individual teachers. 

• A variety of practices exists with regard to how schools develop and review their ICT plan. In 
most instances, however, teachers have opportunities to participate in the process. Few schools 
seek or receive support from their local ICT advisor. 

• ICT plans in case-study post-primary schools revealed that limited planning existed with regard to 
dedicated ICT lessons. Best practice was observed where there were comprehensive plans that 
showed continuity and progression in students’ work. 

• Most schools have an AUP (83% and 87% of primary and post-primary survey respondents, 
respectively). This is a product perhaps of the requirements of the Schools Broadband Access 
Programme and the safety awareness-raising initiatives of the NCTE. It can also be taken as an 
indication of the seriousness that schools attach to the risks associated with use of the internet. 

Continuing professional development 

• Approximately 30% of primary schools and 57% of post-primary schools were found to have 
provided their staff with an in-school or external ICT training course within the last three years. 
Primary teachers prefer in-school training, while post-primary teachers expressed a preference for 
tutor-led courses in education centres. 

• Teachers and principals have different priorities regarding the ICT professional development needs 
of staff members. Primary principals suggested courses in the use of digital imaging, in 
peripherals, and also in computer troubleshooting, whereas primary teachers suggested training 
in the use of software-specific applications in the classroom and the use of the internet and email 
in teaching and learning. Post-primary principals, on the other hand, gave priority to training 
for teachers in specific subject areas and in the area of special educational needs. Post-primary 
teachers considered that training was required in the use of educational software, use of the 
internet in teaching and learning, and subject-specific use of ICT. 

103 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
• Teachers who had attended new or revised syllabus in-service courses regularly, particularly post-
primary teachers, commented that they had received little or no training in how to integrate ICT 
in their teaching in the subject concerned. 

Scoilnet 

• While relatively high proportions of teachers use Scoilnet, they do so infrequently. The majority of 
those who do use it, however, rate it highly. The more popular sections of the site include the 
teachers’ resources and students’ areas. 

• Teachers would like to see more teaching and learning resources made available on the site for 
downloading. 

ICT and teacher planning and preparation 

• The majority of teachers use ICT in their lesson planning and preparation work, for example they 
use computers for preparing teaching materials and the internet for finding suitable teaching 
materials. 

• Younger teachers are more likely to use ICT for their lesson planning and preparation than their 
more experienced colleagues. 

• A higher level of use of ICT in lesson planning was found among teachers who had ready access 
to computer facilities and the internet. 

Planning for the use of ICT in teaching and learning 

• Fewer teachers plan for the use of ICT in teaching and learning than use it in their planning and 
preparation for teaching. Planning for its use in the classroom at the post-primary level varies 
considerably, depending on the subject being taught. 

• The Transition Year, LCVP and LCA encourage increased planning for the use of ICT in teaching 
and learning. Teachers of these programmes regularly reported that their involvement also 
encouraged them to use ICT in their teaching with other class groups. 

Priorities for ICT development in schools 

• Principals and teachers in both primary and post-primary schools identified the provision and 
maintenance of hardware and the provision of teacher education in ICT as being strategically 
important with regard to the development of ICT in their school. 

• Principals also felt that the further integration of ICT in the curriculum was important, while 
primary teachers felt that the updating of relevant educational software and the timetabling of 
ICT lessons for students were crucial. 

104 



ICT planning in primary and post-primary schools Chapter 4 
4.5.2 Recommendations 
Recommendations for policy-makers and policy advisors 

• The NCTE and relevant support and advisory services should work more closely with schools to 
determine the training needs of staff members and to help them to organise appropriate training 
programmes. Particular attention should be given to organising training courses in teaching 
methods that incorporate ICT. 

• School support services should include more examples of how ICT can be used to facilitate 
teaching and learning in any training programmes they provide. Furthermore, course organisers 
and presenters, when organising courses, should take account of the wide range of ICT abilities 
and experience commonly found in groups of teachers, employing strategies for working with 
mixed-ability groups. 

• The contents of Scoilnet should continue to be developed with a view to making more teaching 
and learning resources available for downloading and to encouraging greater use of this resource 
by teachers. 

• Consideration should be given to conducting a review of the LCVP, LCA and Transition Year with 
a view to learning lessons from these programmes with regard to how they have encouraged 
teachers to use ICT in their lesson planning and preparation and in their teaching. Consideration 
needs to be given at second level to extending the use of ICT for such work in other programmes 
and subjects. 

• ICT co-ordinators in schools should be supported in setting up an association or network of ICT 
co-ordinators. This would act as a forum whereby co-ordinators could share information with one 
another, organise training, and engage with a community of practice and learn from others. 

Recommendations for schools 

ICT co-ordination in schools 

• Schools should, wherever practicable, convene an ICT steering committee, which could assist in 
managing the development of their ICT plan and monitor and review its continuous 
implementation. 

• One member of staff should take the lead in managing and co-ordinating ICT in a school. The 
duties of the co-ordinator, where appropriate, should be clearly defined and regularly reviewed 
and should include a significant emphasis on developing strategies for integrating ICT in the 
curriculum. 

105 



ICT in Schools • Part 2 ICT infrastructure and planning in schools 
The ICT plan and the AUP 

• Schools should have an ICT plan. The plan should be formulated by means of a consultative 
process involving teachers and relevant personnel (for example the ICT advisor) and should draw 
from guidelines provided by the NCTE and other support services. 

• A school’s ICT plan should emphasise the use of ICT in teaching and learning, rather than 
concentrating exclusively on the acquisition of equipment or on teachers’ continuing professional 
development in ICT. Ideally it should include guidelines for teachers on setting out appropriate 
learning objectives for each class level in relation to the use of ICT in supporting the 
implementation of the curriculum. 

• Schools should have an acceptable-use policy for computer hardware, software, and the internet. 
The AUP should be drawn up in consultation with all relevant stakeholders and should address all 
users of the technology. 

Continuing professional development 

• Schools should regularly monitor the ICT training needs of their staff and develop and implement 
training plans as appropriate. Training should concentrate on the integration of ICT in teaching 
and learning. 

• Schools should consider liasing with the local education centre and relevant support services for 
the provision of specific courses on site, where possible. The clustering of small schools for the 
purpose of such courses might be explored in certain circumstances. 

ICT and teachers’ planning and preparation 

• All teachers should exploit the benefits to be gained from ICT in their lesson planning and 
preparation. They could endeavour, for example, to make greater use of Scoilnet as part of their 
lesson preparation work. 

• It is recommended that teachers plan systematically for the use of ICT in teaching and learning. 

• Teachers (or subject departments in post-primary schools) should work in collaboration with their 
ICT co-ordinator in identifying and acquiring suitable software resources. 

106 



ICT and teaching and learning in primary schools 
Chapter 5 
107Part 3 
ICT and teaching 
and learning in 
schools 
ICT and teaching and learning in primary schools 
Chapter 5 
107Part 3 
ICT and teaching 
and learning in 
schools 

ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
5.1 Introduction 
This chapter deals with ICT and its contribution to teaching and learning in primary schools. It 
examines how familiar teachers are with the relevant technology and its applications by looking at 
their ICT qualifications and skills. The chapter then reviews the use of ICT in both mainstream and 
special-education settings and its use in assessment, drawing on information collated from 127 
classroom observations made by inspectors during WSE inspections, national questionnaire returns 
made by principals, teachers and students, and inspectors’ reports on thirty-two case-study schools. 

The chapter continues by examining the nature of the impact that ICT has on teaching and learning 
in the classroom. In this regard the views of inspectors, principals, teachers and students are all 
explored. Finally, the chapter draws attention to factors that were found by the evaluation to 
contribute to the successful integration of ICT in classrooms, as well as those that tend to constrain 
its development. 

5.2 Teachers’ ICT qualifications and skills 
The national survey of teachers showed that a relatively small proportion of primary teachers held a 
formal qualification in ICT. Approximately 4% of primary teachers had a postgraduate qualification 
in ICT in education, while a further 6% had other informal qualifications in ICT.51 The proportion of 
teachers with qualifications in ICT increased to 15% when other academic qualifications in ICT were 
included.52 The survey showed that 48% of all teachers studied a module in ICT as part of their pre-
service preparation. This proportion was higher for teachers under the age of thirty-five (81%) than 
for teachers over thirty-five (14%). It may be assumed that teachers who have no formal 
qualification will have developed their ICT skills through personal interest or by availing of relevant 
professional development courses. 

51 Informal qualifications refer to such courses as the European Computer Driving Licence (ECDL). 
52 Other academic qualifications in ICT might include a BSc in computer science. 

108 



ICT and teaching and learning in primary schools Chapter 5 
Teachers were asked to state their perceived level of proficiency in a number of important ICT skills 
areas.53 An analysis of the responses to this question showed that the majority of teachers do not 
consider themselves proficient in a wide range of ICT skills and applications. In addition, the majority 
of teachers report their ability to use ICT-facilitated methods and to assess the potential of computer 
applications and the internet as low. The highest levels of proficiency were reported in word-
processing, the internet, and e-mail. Table 5.1 shows that more than 60% of all teachers rated their 
proficiency as “intermediate” or “advanced” in each of these areas. The lowest levels of proficiency 
were reported for networking, data-logging, assistive technology software, and programming or 
scripting. In general, proficiency correlated with age: younger teachers (under thirty-five) reported 
higher levels of ICT proficiency and use than their more experienced colleagues. This probably 
reflects a growing emphasis in teacher education on developing the ICT skills of student teachers, as 
well as the impact of an increasingly technological society. In the light of the importance of ICT in 
promoting a wider range of teaching and learning methods, including inquiry-based approaches, 
the education departments in third-level colleges should consider giving further priority to the 
inclusion of ICT in the preparation of students for teaching various aspects of the curriculum. 

Table 5.1: Proportion of primary teachers who rated their proficiency in ICT skills as either 
“intermediate” or “advanced” 

Age Gender 
Under 35 35–45 Over 45 Male Female Total 
Word-processing 79% 63% 48% 68% 67% 67% 
Internet 83% 57% 42% 72% 67% 66% 
E-mail 79% 53% 40% 71% 63% 63% 
Reference software 52% 42% 33% 51% 44% 45% 
Operating systems 48% 32% 21% 38% 39% 38% 
Painting or drawing programs 45% 28% 23% 43% 35% 36% 
File management 45% 30% 20% 47% 34% 35% 
Exploratory software 36% 36% 27% 47% 32% 34% 
Presentation 47% 23% 16% 39% 33% 33% 
Content-rich software 37% 30% 29% 37% 33% 33% 
Spreadsheets 35% 13% 13% 28% 24% 24% 
Graphics programs 33% 17% 11% 32% 23% 24% 
Multimedia 33% 12% 11% 31% 21% 23% 
Troubleshooting 23% 13% 11% 26% 17% 18% 
Databases 24% 10% 9% 24% 16% 17% 
Assistive technology software 12% 10% 12% 16% 11% 11% 
Programming or scripting 17% 7% 3% 14% 11% 11% 
Data-logging software 13% 6% 5% 15% 9% 10% 
Networking 10% 5% 3% 11% 7% 7% 
n 569 270 281 155 893 1,162 

53 Respondents were able to describe their level of proficiency in the different skills areas as “none,” “basic,” “intermediate,” or 
“advanced.” 

109 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
However, when teachers’ reported use of the relevant applications was correlated with their 
reported proficiency, as depicted in fig. 5.1, it was found that the level of proficiency was not 
reflected in actual use of the application. For example, the relatively low level of use of the internet 
and e-mail in classroom practice does not reflect teachers’ reported high levels of proficiency in their 
use. Hence it can be assumed that other factors, such as individual teachers’ motivation and access, 
influence the transfer of competence in individual applications to classroom practice. 

Fig. 5.1: Use and related proficiency of applications in teaching 

Word processing 
Content-rich software 
Paint/drawing packages 
Reference software 
Exploratory software 
Internet 
Graphics packages 
Assistive technology software 
E-mail 
Presentation 
Multimedia 
Spreadsheets 
Databases 
Datalogging software 
Programming/scripting 

100% 75% 75% 25% 100% 75%75%25%0% 
Usage in teaching (at least once) Proficiency of user (Intermediate or advanced) 
84% 
80% 
71% 
62% 
62% 
46% 
32% 
31% 
29% 
28% 
27% 
22% 
21% 
12% 
8% 
77% 
47% 
48% 
63% 
52% 
76% 
48% 
31% 
72% 
67% 
50% 
47% 
38% 
28% 
43% 
Base: Usage is based on teachers using applications in their teaching (n > 793) 
Proficiency is based on teachers using applications in their teaching (n > 63) 

When asked about their ability to use teaching and learning methods that are facilitated by ICT, 
30% of primary teachers felt they had “intermediate” or “advanced” ability. Table 5.2 also shows 
that approximately four out of ten teachers reported that they had “intermediate” or “advanced” 
ability to assess the potential of educational software (40% of teachers) or internet material (41% 
of teachers) to facilitate teaching and learning. Younger teachers and male teachers were more 

110 



ICT and teaching and learning in primary schools Chapter 5 
positive in the assessment of their abilities in all three areas. The SCR ratio had a negligible effect on 
teachers’ self-assessment. 

Table 5.2: Proportion of primary teachers who rated their ability in each of three ICT tasks 
that facilitate teaching and learning as either “intermediate” or “advanced” 

Age Gender SCR 
Under 35 35-45 Over 45 Male Female Low High Overall 
Using teaching and learning 

38% 

25% 

20% 

34% 

29% 

28% 

32% 

30% 
methods that are facilitated by ICT 
Assessing the quality of 

46% 

37% 

27% 

48% 

38% 

40% 

41% 

40% 
educational software to support 
teaching and learning 
Assessing the quality of 

50% 

37% 

26% 

48% 

40% 

41% 

41% 

41% 
internet material to support 
teaching and learning 

n 

569 

270 

281 

155 

893 

533 

534 

1,162 

The analysis also shows that teachers’ competence is not of itself enough to ensure the transfer of 
that competence into practice. Obviously other factors, such as the availability of resources, 
teachers’ motivation, and the school culture, will affect actual use in teaching and learning. If ICT is 
to be effectively integrated in teaching and learning it is clear that a holistic approach, embracing 
awareness-raising, professional development (pre-service, induction and in-service), planning, and 
infrastructure, will be required. 

5.3 Classroom practice and ICT 
5.3.1 Planning 
Inspectors asked teachers during WSE inspections about their planning for the use ICT in their 
teaching. Some 43% of mainstream teachers, as shown in fig. 5.2, reported that their planning 
showed how they intended to use ICT in their teaching. 

111 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
Fig. 5.2: Extent to which mainstream teachers plan for the use of ICT 

Does your planning show how you intend to use ICT in your teaching? 

No 57% Yes 43% 
Base: All mainstream class teachers (n = 127) 

Of those teachers who showed how they intended to use ICT in their teaching, the main planning 
emphasis was on curricular areas (96%), followed by planning for the development of discrete ICT 
skills (74%), and the use of ICT to provide for students with special needs (56%). English was the 
most prominent curricular area for teachers who planned to use ICT in their teaching (94%), 
followed by Mathematics (64%). Teachers of senior classes were more likely than teachers of junior 
classes to plan for the use of ICT in the teaching of Science, History and Geography.54 Slightly more 
than three-quarters (76%) of all teachers stated that their planning was based on the school’s 
planning for ICT. 

5.3.2 Frequency of ICT use 
During their WSE inspections, inspectors distinguished between finding evidence of the use of ICT 
to facilitate teaching and learning in the classrooms visited and actual observation of the use of ICT 
during the inspection period.55 Table 5.3 shows that inspectors reported evidence of ICT being used 
to facilitate teaching and learning in 59% of the 127 classroom observations carried out as part of 
WSE inspections. However, in only 22% of instances did they observe ICT being used in the 
classroom during an inspection period of approximately two hours. The differences between the 
indirect evidence of the use of ICT and the inspectors’ first-hand observation of the use of ICT in 
teaching suggests that there is limited integration of ICT in the teaching and learning processes. 
Inspectors found evidence of higher levels of ICT use in senior classes (70% of classroom 
observations) than in junior classes (46% of classroom observations). This would suggest that the 
potential of ICT is not being fully realised in the critical early years of a child’s development. 

54 Junior classes: infants to second class (inclusive). Senior classes: third class to sixth class (inclusive). 

55 Examples of such evidence include samples of pupils’ work, displays of work involving ICT, and pupils’ responses to questions posed 
by the inspector or teacher. 

112 



ICT and teaching and learning in primary schools Chapter 5 
Table 5.3: Inspectors’ observations on the use of ICT to facilitate teaching and learning in 
classrooms 

Class SCR Total 
Junior classes Senior classes Low High 
Evidence of the use of ICT to 

facilitate teaching and learning 

46% 

70% 

60% 

62% 

59% 

Use of ICT observed in actual 

teaching and learning during the 

inspection period 

20% 

23% 

27% 

18% 

22% 
n 

54 

67 

58 

55 

127 

5.3.3 Organisation of ICT use 
Inspectors who observed the actual use of ICT during inspection visits were asked to state how ICT 
activities were organised. It was found that the most frequently used organisational approach to the 
use of ICT in classrooms was one where the students used computers individually; this was followed 
by paired use and then whole-class use. Much of the individual ICT activity was organised in 
rotation. Similarly, respondents to the survey of teachers, as depicted in fig. 5.3, reported that the 
most frequently used approach was classroom activity in which individual students worked in 
rotation, followed by group activity and whole-class teaching in the classroom. In this instance, 46% 
of all primary mainstream and special class teachers reported that they organise the use of ICT in 
rotation at least once a week for individual students in the classroom. 

Fig. 5.3: Organisation of teaching and learning during use of ICT 

How is teaching and learning organised 
during use of ICT? 

Individual students working in classroom on a 
rotational basis 

Group activity in classroom 

Whole-class teaching in classroom 

Whole-class teaching in designated computer room 

Group activity in designated computer room 

Individual students working in designated computer 
room/library on a rotational basis 

80%60% 100%40%20%0% 
46% 
19% 19% 25% 
11% 12% 23% 
20% 9% 10% 
11% 10% 13% 
8% 
20% 18% 
7% 6% 
At least once a week 
About 2/3 times a month 
Less than twice a month 

Base: All primary mainstream and special class teachers (n = 1026) 

113 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
It could be assumed that this predominant use of ICT with individual students has a relatively low 
impact, given the likelihood that each student would have access to ICT for relatively short periods. 
However, it is positive that both paired and group approaches, as well as whole-class approaches, 
are used. The findings of the evaluation also give an insight into how teachers organise the use of 
ICT in accordance with specific school factors, such as the level of resources available. Individual or 
paired activity in rotation reflects a sensible use of resources in situations where resources are 
confined to a stand-alone computer (or computers). In this regard it is important that classroom 
organisational matters be emphasised in support materials and courses for teachers so that they can 
exploit potential opportunities for using ICT within the classroom, regardless of the resources 
available. 

5.3.4 Focus of ICT use 
The evaluation found that ICT, where used, predominates in core curricular areas, such as English 
and Mathematics, and Social, Environmental and Scientific Education (SESE), but that even this use 
of ICT is relatively infrequent. The national survey of teachers, as shown in fig. 5.4, demonstrated 
that ICT was used most frequently to promote learning in English. However, only 39% of these 
teachers used ICT in their teaching of English at least once a week. This weekly use was high relative 
to that for Mathematics and SESE, which had a weekly use of 28% and 14%, respectively. 
Furthermore, the case-study evaluations suggest that the use of ICT in the teaching of English, 
Mathematics and SESE is mainly to support and reinforce aspects of these subjects already taught. 

Fig. 5.4: Frequency of ICT use to promote learning in curricular areas 

80%60% 100%40%20%0% 
39% 
28% 
14% 
8% 
6% 
7% 
5% 
28% 25% 
29% 29% 
29% 33% 
19% 42% 
17% 30% 
14% 
19% 
7% 
6% 
27% 
English 
Mathematics 
SESE 
The Arts 
SPHE 
Irish 
Religious Education 
Physical Education 
Modern Languages 
At least once a week 
About 2/3 times a month 
Less than twice a month 

Base: All primary mainstream and special class teachers (n = 1026) 

114 



ICT and teaching and learning in primary schools Chapter 5 
Both teachers and inspectors reported limited use, if any, of ICT in the teaching of other curricular 
areas. The low level of use in the teaching of Irish relative to the other core subjects is particularly 
disappointing given the potential of ICT as a tool in enhancing students’ motivation to learn the 
language. 

Teachers were asked in their national survey how frequently they used ICT to develop certain skills in 
their students. Fig. 5.5 shows that ICT is most frequently used to develop numeracy, reading and 
writing skills and less frequently to develop other important cross-curricular skills, such as research, 
presentation, social, problem-solving and communication skills. The use of ICT in developing 
reading, numeracy and writing skills, however, was infrequent, with fewer than 30% of teachers 
reporting using ICT at least once a week to develop these skills. 

Fig. 5.5: Frequency of ICT use among mainstream and special class teachers to facilitate 
development of skills 

Frequency of ICT usage to develop the following skills 


Skills in numeracy 
Reading skills 
Writing skills 
Referencing/research 
Presentation skills 
Social/team/collaborative 
Problem solving/analytical 
Communication skills 

80%60% 100%40%20%0% 
25% 31% 27% 
29% 26% 27% 
22% 29% 30% 
7% 26%14% 
13%10% 
6% 18%10% 
8% 21% 
13% 
At least once a week 
About 2/3 times a month 
Less than twice a month 

Base: All primary mainstream and special class teachers (n = 1026) 

In the course of WSE inspections, however, inspectors noted the prominent use of ICT to support 
the teaching of reading and writing. Furthermore, the case-study school evaluations showed that 
the use of ICT in reading and numeracy was mainly for the purpose of consolidating learning, and 
that the use of ICT for the teaching of writing was generally limited to presenting personal writing 
and writing for projects, with little emphasis on the writing process. The case-study evaluations 
showed that the development of research skills was conducted mainly in the context of SESE and 
looking-and-responding activities in the Visual Arts, while the use of ICT to develop discrete skills 
was concentrated on word-processing and typing skills. 

115 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
The evaluation showed a degree of correlation between a school’s SCR and the range of skills 
taught. An analysis of inspectors’ observations during classroom inspections, for example, found 
that schools with a low SCR were more likely to teach presentation, social, team and collaborative 
skills or communication skills than schools with a high SCR. The use of ICT to develop numeracy and 
reading skills was more prevalent in these schools. Similarly, the survey of teachers found that those 
in schools with a low SCR were more likely to use ICT to develop most skills. In the questionnaires 
for students a slightly higher proportion of those in schools with a low SCR said that they learnt 
more about computers at school than those in schools with a high SCR. 

The evaluation found a degree of progression in the development of ICT skills from junior to senior 
classes. Inspectors’ observations during WSE inspection visits showed that ICT was used more 
prominently to develop writing skills and referencing, research and investigation skills in senior 
classes and to develop reading skills in junior classes. The survey of teachers similarly showed that 
teachers of senior classes were more likely to use ICT for writing purposes and referencing, research 
or investigation skills, while teachers of junior classes were more likely to use ICT to develop reading 
skills. A range of inspectors’ reports on case-study schools showed a similar progression. 

It is clear from this examination that the use of ICT is somewhat limited in primary schools, and that 
the potential for using ICT to develop critical life skills, such as communication, problem-solving and 
independent working skills, is not being realised. Evaluations of the implementation of the primary 
curriculum in recent years have also drawn attention to the deficit of provision in relation to the 
development of higher-order skills. The narrowness of the range of skills developed, particularly in 
the junior classes, is of concern, given that this is a critical time in a child’s development. It is 
important that these students should have the same opportunity as those in senior classes to 
develop their presentation, research and higher-order skills through the use of ICT. There is a great 
need, therefore, to promote the development of these skills through ICT with regard to the 
implementation of the curriculum. The “Framework for ICT in Curriculum and Assessment” at 
present being developed by the NCCA will provide schools with advice in this area. 

5.3.5 Use of resources and applications in the classroom 
Software 

The national survey of teachers explored the extent to which software was used to facilitate 
teaching and learning. In general, as shown in table 5.4, some 86% of teachers used software to 
facilitate teaching and learning. Teachers of senior classes were slightly more likely to use software 
to facilitate teaching and learning (90%) than teachers of junior classes (83%). A lower SCR tended 
to have a positive impact on the use of software to facilitate teaching and learning, with 89% of 
teachers in schools with a low SCR reporting such use, compared with 83% of those in schools with 
a high SCR. It was also found that the three most common sources of advice regarding the selection 
of applications for particular curriculum areas were colleagues (85%), educational software suppliers 
(52%), and the ICT advisor (29%). 

116 



ICT and teaching and learning in primary schools Chapter 5 
Table 5.4: Teachers’ use of software and the internet to support learning 

Class SCR Total 
Junior classes Senior classes Low High 
Use of internet resources in 
planning and preparation for 
teaching 

69% 

74% 

71% 

67% 

69% 
Use of the internet in classroom 
practice 

15% 

37% 

28% 

20% 

24% 
Use of software to facilitate 
teaching and learning 

83% 

90% 

89% 

83% 

86% 
n 

486 

430 

533 

534 

1,162 

Case-study school evaluation reports emphasised the importance of software in facilitating the use 
of ICT in schools. A number of reports, for example, made explicit links between the availability of 
software and the extent to which ICT was used in a given school. The inspectors found widespread 
use of software resources in literacy and numeracy; however, they found that this was limited for 
the most part to consolidation (that is, reinforcing number facts and phonic skills), especially in 
junior classes and in the special-education setting. Apart from the use of software in SESE, case-
study school evaluations found a dearth of software in use for other aspects of the curriculum. 

Teachers of mainstream and special classes were asked in their survey to state which applications 
they used in their teaching in different curricular areas. Table 5.5 shows that the use of software 
predominated in the subject areas where ICT is used most frequently (that is, English, Mathematics, 
SESE, and the Visual Arts). The reliance on word-processing and the internet for other subjects, such 
as Irish, could be due to the relative lack of software available to support the use of ICT in those 
curricular areas, in contrast to that available for the other core areas. 

Table 5.5: Most frequently used applications in the teaching of individual curricular areas 

Subject Application(s) 
English Word-processing or desktop publishing [page layout] and content-rich software 
Mathematics Content-rich software 
Social, Environmental, and 
Scientific Education (SESE) Reference software 
Visual Arts Painting and drawing programs 
Social, Personal and Health 
Education (SPHE) Word-processing or desktop publishing 
Irish Word-processing or desktop publishing 
Religion Word-processing or desktop publishing and internet 
Physical Education Internet 
Modern Languages Word-processing or desktop publishing and internet 

117 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
Given the importance of software in facilitating the integration of ICT throughout the curriculum, 
there is a need to make primary teachers aware of the range of materials available in all curricular 
areas. It is also important that teachers are able to assess the potential of computer applications for 
use in their classrooms; developing this ability should be a central consideration in ICT training 
opportunities. As recommended by inspectors in the case-study school evaluations, schools should 
consider drawing up an inventory of computer applications in accordance with their suitability for 
class levels. Teachers also need to become more aware of the potential of other ICT applications, to 
become more competent in their use, and to engage in planning for their use in order that they can 
more fully integrate ICT in the teaching of the curriculum. 

The internet 

The survey of teachers asked them about their use of internet resources in planning and preparation 
for teaching and the use of the internet in classroom practice. As already seen in table 5.4, the 
internet was reported to be used as a resource in planning and preparation for teaching by 69% of 
all teachers. It was also found that such use was related to teaching experience, with recently 
qualified teachers being more likely to use internet resources in planning and preparation for 
teaching than their more experienced colleagues. 

However, teachers’ reported use of the internet in classroom practice was much lower than its use for 
planning and preparation. Only 24% of all teachers reported using the internet in classroom practice. 
The main reason for this difference was lack of internet access in the classroom, as cited by 58% of 
teachers. Presumably teachers have access to the internet outside school for the purposes of planning 
and preparation, while access within school is still somewhat limited. Other reasons reported by 
teachers for not using the internet in their classroom practice were lack of time (9%), lack of 
knowledge (9%), lack of computers (8%), and lack of suitability for children of this age (8%). 

Teachers of senior classes were more likely to use the internet in classroom practice (37%) than 
teachers of junior classes (15%). A low SCR had a slightly positive impact on the use of the internet 
to facilitate teaching and learning: some 28% of teachers in schools with a low SCR reported using 
the internet in their classroom practice, compared with 20% of teachers in schools with a high SCR. 

Those teachers who stated that they used the internet in their classroom practice (24% of all 
teachers) were also asked how frequently they used various internet resources. Fig. 5.6 shows the 
findings with regard to the use of internet resources in descending order of frequency of use.56 

56 Any percentage on or below 5 % is not labelled. 

118 



ICT and teaching and learning in primary schools Chapter 5 
Fig. 5.6: Frequency of use of individual internet resources by internet users 

How frequently do you use the following internet resources in 
your teaching? 

Teaching resources 

Educational news/current events 

E-mail 
Strategies for integrating ICT inteaching and learning 
On-line resources for students 
with SEN 
On-line professional development 

On-line subscription-based 
content 
On-line discussions 

On-line collaborative projects 

Webquests 

E-twinning 

Videoconferences 

Wikis 

Blogs 

80%60% 100%40%20%0% 
26%36%35% 
14% 30% 36% 
22%17%20% 
8% 13% 37% 
33%14% 
12% 28% 
20% 
14% 
16% 
8% 
7% 
At least once a week 
About 2/3 times a month 
Less than twice a month 

Base: All primary teachers using internet in teaching (n = 275) 

Of the teachers who used the internet in classroom practice, the most frequently used internet 
resources were teaching resources, educational news, information on current events, and e-mail. 
More than a third (35%) of all teachers using the internet used it at least once a week to obtain 
access to teaching resources. 

In their visits to the thirty-two case-study schools inspectors found that teachers made very limited 
use, if any, of the internet in their classrooms. In many of these instances there was an expectation 
that the installation of broadband would greatly facilitate the use of the internet as a teaching and 
learning tool. Where the internet was used, activities included carrying out research activities (for 
example project work in SESE and Visual Arts) through the use of search engines and educational 
sites. One school used e-pal web sites for the development of students’ communication skills. In 
another school, students had used interactive web sites in support of their science programme. 

119 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
It is clear that the use of the internet by teachers in the classroom is limited (for the most part 
because of a lack of infrastructure), despite the fact that teachers themselves appear familiar with 
internet use, particularly in planning and obtaining access to resources and ideas for teaching. 
However, the practices observed in case-study schools, though engaged in on a limited scale, 
illustrate the potential for use of the internet in the classroom for developing such abilities as 
communication skills. Recent assistance to schools from the Department of Education and Science 
with regard to enhancing connectivity in schools should help to facilitate teachers in realising the 
potential of the internet. 

Peripherals 

Chapter 3 has already shown that there is little general use of peripherals, apart from printers, in 
primary classrooms. This is a cause of concern, given the role that the effective use of peripherals 
can play in the integration of ICT in teaching and learning, and the additional potential for their 
effective use in tandem with other ICT resources. For example, one inspector in a case-study school 
commented favourably on integrated ICT activity involving internet research, recording with a digital 
camera during field trips, and presenting findings using presentation software. Other inspectors 
commented favourably on the use of digital video recorders for the production of films. 

It is clear that teachers need to be made more aware of the potential of software, the internet and 
peripheral resources and to become more confident in their use. This may be addressed in more 
focused ICT planning and enhanced training opportunities. 

5.3.6 Quality of provision 
The national survey of principals explored their views on how existing use of ICT in their school was 
benefiting teaching and learning. The comments of principals were mainly positive. They expressed 
the view that ICT is useful for motivating students, for consolidating their learning, for improving 
how they present their work, and for presenting an additional challenge. They also suggested that 
ICT motivates children, promotes imagination and creativity, and develops problem-solving skills. In 
general, 51% of the principals surveyed were of the view that using ICT contributed to improved 
ICT skills, while 34% felt that it contributed to improving class content and support of the 
curriculum. 

Teachers also expressed positive attitudes in relation to the impact of ICT on teaching and learning. 
In the course of interviews in the case-study schools, teachers suggested a number of factors as 
having a positive impact in the classroom. 

• The visual impact and interactive nature of ICT has a positive effect on students’ motivation and 
levels of interest. It enhances their confidence, particularly those with special educational needs, 
and it increases students’ enjoyment of learning. 

120 



ICT and teaching and learning in primary schools Chapter 5 ICT and teaching and learning in primary schools Chapter 5 
• ICT assists the development of good social skills in the classroom, the development of cooperation 
between students and teachers, and the promotion of peer tutoring in classrooms. 

• ICT facilitates the development of students’ recording and presentation skills, followed by 
independent and self-correcting skills and research and information retrieval skills. 

• ICT is important in reinforcing and consolidating skills and learning. 

However, while teachers, both at the principal and the classroom level, were generally quite positive 
about the role of ICT in teaching and learning in primary classrooms inspectors found that the 
undoubted potential of ICT was frequently unrealised. As noted earlier inspectors found relatively 
limited evidence of the integration of ICT in teaching and learning in the classroom, with, for 
example, the use of ICT in only 22% of classroom observations. 

121 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
As well as frequency of use inspectors also reported on the quality of use of ICT in teaching and 
learning where it was observed during the inspection period in classrooms visited during WSEs. Fig. 

5.7 shows that 34% of inspectors’ reports on classroom observations reveal limited or inappropriate 
use, or no use, of ICT in teaching and learning. In 42% of instances the inspectors reported that 
there was scope for development, while in 24% of instances they reported a competent or optimal 
level of performance. The proportion of competent or optimal levels was higher for senior classes 
(30%) than for junior classes (15%). 
Fig. 5.7: Inspectors’ rating of the quality of use of ICT in teaching and learning 

No, very little, or Scope for Competent Optimal level of 
inappropriate use of ICT development practice performance 

Base: All mainstream class observations (n=127) 

Inspectors also provided some commentary in relation to their rating of the quality of use of ICT in 
teaching and learning in the classroom. These comments point to a reliance on software for ICT use, 
and show that such factors as lack of planning and preparation constrain the effective use of ICT in 
classrooms and the systematic development of curricular skills using ICT. Table 5.6 provides a sample 
of these comments. 

60% 
40% 
20% 
0% 
34% 
42% 
19% 
5% 
122 



ICT and teaching and learning in primary schools Chapter 5 
Table 5.6: Inspectors’ comments on the quality of use of ICT observed in teaching and 
learning 

Rating (class) Inspector’s comment 
Very little use, or inappropriate 

Discussions with the teacher reveal that ICT is used incidentally and for very short periods. 
use, of ICT (junior classes) 

Two programs were used intermittently, which are designed to enhance the students’ 
literacy skills. The teacher uses the internet to research work occasionally. In general, the 
use of ICT in the classroom is incidental rather than being planned or systematic. 

Scope for development 

The work the children were doing during the course of the evaluation was not adequately 
(senior class) 

prepared, and they were simply transcribing from the screen. It is worth noting, however, 
that they did have the ability to operate the search engine to obtain access to information 
on the topic of their choice. 

Competent practice 

Students are somewhat familiar with the use of Powerpoint as a medium of presentation 
(senior class) 

but still need clear direction from the teacher and are clearly dependent on her to an extent 
in manipulating the computers in the room. The teacher uses Powerpoint in presentation. 
Optimal level of performance 

Software on Ancient Egyptians: excellent stimulation of students, clarification of 
(middle class) 

information and consolidation. ICT used in project work; also video and camcorder use. 

Inspectors who visited case-study schools gave additional insights into the quality and range of ICT 
activity in primary schools. Many commented favourably on the attitude, enthusiasm and 
confidence of fifth-class students in using ICT, citing, for example, good use of relevant internet sites 
and reference software, both for project work and incidental research. 

Other commendable practices observed by the inspectors in case-study schools included: 
• the use of ICT to facilitate the writing process of drafting and redrafting and students’ writing in 
a variety of genres 
• the use of ICT in higher-order activities, such as the development of students’ critical skills in 
looking and responding to art, the use of exploratory software to develop problem-solving skills 
and logic capabilities, and the use of spreadsheets 
• the use of ICT to develop creative skills, such as drawing and design, listening and responding, 

activity in music, and construction skills (through the use of robotics) 
• the use of the digital camera in producing group and class projects 
• the use of ICT in teaching Irish poetry 
• the use of ICT to create and to record musical compositions 
• the use of databases for the collation, examination and presentation of data 
• the use of computer-generated presentations by students to present their project work. 

123 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
However, the inspectors found that the range of skills and knowledge displayed by students varied 
significantly among case-study schools, and that competence in the use of ICT was limited for the 
most part to basic ICT skills, centred on the use of word-processing for personal writing and project 
work. One inspector described this in the following terms: 

A number of students in senior classes have developed some competency in ICT skills relating to the use 
of word-processing and the internet. They have also used the computer in the writing process and have 
access to content-rich mathematics and reading software. Students enjoy opportunities to paint and draw 
using the computer. Students are enthusiastic and confident in their discussion in respect of this relatively 
simple use of ICT. 

Despite this emphasis on the development of basic ICT skills, the survey of fifth-class students 
showed, as illustrated in fig. 5.8, that many lack the competence to complete basic tasks on the 
computer. While most reported that they were able to perform many basic computer tasks, such as 
turning the computer on and off and opening or saving a file, more than 30% reported that they 
were not able to print a document or to go on the internet by themselves, while almost half (47%) 
reported not being able to create a document by themselves. The majority were unaware of how to 
create a presentation (72%), use a spreadsheet (86%), or send an attachment with an e-mail 
message (88%). 

124 



ICT and teaching and learning in primary schools Chapter 5 
Fig. 5.8: Students’ proficiency in individual tasks 

How well can you do each of these tasks on a computer? 

Shut down the computer 
Turn on a computer 
Open a file 
Save a document or file 
Print a document or file 
Go on the internet 
Create a document 
Delete a document or file 
Move files from one place to another 
Open an e-mail 
Write and send an e-mail 
Copy or download files from the internet 
Copy a file from a floppy disk 
Create a graph 
Create a presentation 
Send an attachment with an e-mail 
Use a spreadsheet 

80%60% 100%40%20%0% 
5%95% 
4%95% 
15%82% 
14%77% 
24%66% 
26%64% 
36%53% 
25%63% 
34%39% 
33%40% 
38%31% 
39%31% 
39%28% 
33%28% 
24%28% 
37%12% 
23%14% 
I can do this very well by myself 
I can do this with help from someone 

Base: All primary students (n = 437) 

Interestingly, more than four out of five students (82%) in the case-study schools who completed 
questionnaires stated that using a computer helped them with their schoolwork. This was mainly 
through the use of the internet for projects. Only 39% reported that they used their home 
computer for homework. A higher proportion of girls (87%) than boys (77%) stated that using a 
computer helped them with their schoolwork; this was primarily through typing stories, poems, and 
essays. Similarly, slightly more girls (43%) than boys (36%) stated that a computer helped them with 
their homework, again primarily for typing poems, essays, and stories. 

In general, it can be said that limited use is at present made of ICT in teaching and learning in 
primary schools. However, despite the constraints that inhibit the greater use of the technology, 
there are examples of its effective use that could be extended and built on through taking such 
steps as sharing good practice within and between schools. 

125 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
5.3.7 Provision for students with special educational needs by 
mainstream class teachers 
The evaluation found that the level of ICT used to assist students with special educational needs 
within mainstream classrooms is quite low, despite the fact that the great majority of classrooms 
have children who have access to additional support. As shown in fig. 5.9, 53% of teachers in the 
schools visited by inspectors during WSE classroom inspections reported that they used ICT to assist 
students with special educational needs. Of those who did, teaching and learning was primarily 
facilitated by a student working individually on a computer (64% of teachers). These teachers 
reported using programs and web sites to assist their students. Teachers of senior classes were more 
likely to use ICT to assist students with special educational needs in their class (63%) than teachers 
of junior classes (39%). Given the predominantly individualised nature of the ICT-related activity 
involved, this may be related to the greater ability of older students to work independently, 
compared with that of the younger students. 

Fig. 5.9: Level of ICT support for students with special educational needs in mainstream 
classrooms 

Do you use ICT to support students with special educational needs in class? 

No 47% Yes 53% 
Base: All mainstream class teachers (n = 127) 

However, in only 11% of classroom observations did the inspectors on WSE visits observe the use of 
ICT in mainstream classrooms to assist students with special educational needs. Similarly to what 
was reported by teachers, the inspectors observed that the use of ICT to assist students with special 
educational needs was highest for senior classes and was primarily organised individually. 

The low level of ICT use with students with special educational needs in mainstream classrooms 
shows that the potential of ICT to provide a differentiated curriculum for those students is not being 
realised. There is clearly a need for teachers to become more aware of how to use ICT to 
differentiate work for their students. It is also of note that where children with special educational 
needs are given the opportunity to engage in ICT-related activity it is primarily as individuals. The 
potential for embracing paired or group activity in this regard could be further explored. 

126 



ICT and teaching and learning in primary schools Chapter 5 
5.4 ICT in special education 
Over the past decade there has been a significant increase in the level of resources provided for 
students with special educational needs within mainstream primary schools. The evaluation 
attempted to gain an insight into the extent and quality of the use of ICT in special-needs 
education. This section of the report looks at the provision for children with special educational 
needs by members of the special-education support team.57 

5.4.1 Access to ICT 
Inspectors on WSE inspections explored the level of access that students had to ICT in the special-
education setting. Some 85% of the seventy-one members of special-education support teams 
interviewed in schools, as shown in fig. 5.10, stated that their students had access to ICT. Of those 
with access, 90% said that ICT activity took place in the special-education support setting. Half 
(50%) of all respondents said that teaching and learning using ICT was organised by individually 
working with students with special educational needs. Somewhat less than half (45%) of 
respondents said that a combination of individual and group or paired work was used. 

Fig. 5.10: Level of access by students with special educational needs in special-education 
support settings 

Do students have access to ICT in this 
context? 

No 15% 
Yes 85% 
Base: All special education team members (n = 71) 

5.4.2 Planning for the use of ICT 
Approximately 57% of the members of special-education teams interviewed by the inspectors on 
WSE visits, as illustrated in fig. 5.11, reported that their planning showed how they intended to use 
ICT in their teaching. Of those who displayed an intention to use ICT in their teaching, the main 
emphasis was on reading (92%), followed by numeracy (82%) and writing (56%). Some 60% of 
special-education support teachers who planned for the use of ICT in their teaching reported that 
this planning was based on the school’s planning for ICT. 

57 Members of the special-education support team include the resource teacher, learning-support teacher and resource teacher for 
Travellers. It should be noted that, in accordance with Circular 02/05, learning-support teachers and resource teachers are now 
referred to as learning-support and resource teachers (LSRTs). 

127 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
Fig. 5.11: Extent to which special-education support team members plan for the use of ICT 

Does your planning show how you intend to use ICT in your teaching? 

No 43% Yes 57% 
Base: All special education team members (n = 71) 

5.4.3 Frequency of ICT use 
Inspectors were asked to distinguish between evidence of the use of ICT to facilitate teaching and 
learning in the classrooms visited and actual observation of ICT in teaching and learning during the 
inspection period.58 Fig. 5.12 shows that 63% of the inspectors reported that they saw evidence of 
the use of ICT to facilitate teaching and learning in these classrooms, while 42% observed ICT being 
used in teaching and learning during the inspection period. This use is much higher than the level of 
ICT use observed by inspectors to provide for mainstream students (24%) and students with special 
educational needs within mainstream classrooms (11%). Most ICT use by members of the special-
education team was through individual work with the student (69% of instances). 

Fig. 5.12: Inspectors’ observations of the use of ICT to facilitate teaching and learning in 
special-education support settings 

Is there evidence of the use of ICT Was use of ICT observed in actual teaching 
to support teaching and learning? and learning during the inspection period? 

No 37% Yes 63% 
No 58% Yes 42% 
Base: All special education team observations (n = 71) Base: All special education team observations (n = 71) 

58 Examples of such evidence include samples of pupils’ work, displays of work involving ICT, and pupils’ responses to questions posed 
by the inspector or teacher. 

128 



ICT and teaching and learning in primary schools Chapter 5 
5.4.4 Focus of ICT use 
The extent to which members of special-education support teams were using ICT to facilitate 
teaching and learning in a number of priority areas was explored as part of the evaluation. The 
special-education support teachers who responded to the national survey reported, as shown in fig. 
5.13, that the main use of ICT in the special-education setting was for reading, numeracy, writing, 
and the development of motor sensory skills. Some 75% of these special-education teachers 
reported using ICT to develop reading skills at least once a week, which was far more frequent than 
that reported for writing skills (40%), motor sensory skills (46%), and numeracy skills (54%). The 
inspectors observing classroom practice during WSE inspections also found that the main skills being 
developed were (in declining order of frequency) reading, numeracy, and writing. 

The evaluation found that there is a greater general range of skills development in the special-
education support setting than in mainstream classrooms. While ICT is used much less frequently for 
the development of other skills, such as communication, referencing, presentation, and higher-order 
skills, the use of ICT for the development of these skills is still much more frequent than that 
reported for mainstream classrooms.59 

Fig. 5.13: Frequency of ICT use in special-education support settings to facilitate 
development of skills 

How frequently is ICT used as a strategy to achieve learning targets 
for students attending resource teaching and learning support in 
each of the following areas? 

Reading skills 

Writing skills 

Skills in numeracy 

Motor sensory skills 

Communication skills 

Referencing/research 
skills 

Presentation skills 

Behavioural 

management skills 

Problem solving/ 

analytic skills 

Social/team/ 

collaborative skills 

80%60% 100%40%20%0% 
75% 18% 
14%39%40% 
54% 25% 11% 
10%23%46% 
30% 28% 16% 
32%21%16% 
15% 28% 24% 
17%23%23% 
25% 17% 19% 
14%17%21% 
At least once a week 
About 2/3 times a month 
Less than twice a month 

Base: All primary learning support teachers (n = 136) 

59 This can be seen when fig. 5.5 and fig. 5.13 are compared. 

129 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
In general, the relatively high frequency of use of ICT by members of the special-education support 
team to promote the development of literacy and numeracy is not surprising, given the priority 
attached to these core curricular skills in schools in this learning context. ICT facilitates a multi-
sensory approach to the teaching of essential skills through the use, for example, of data projectors, 
speakers, and interactive whiteboards, and this should be exploited in special-education settings 
wherever appropriate. 

5.4.5 Use of resources and applications 
The survey of teachers explored the degree to which different applications were used in the 
development of a range of special educational needs priority areas. Members of the special-
education support teams, as illustrated in table 5.7, were found to use applications most frequently 
for the development of reading and writing skills.60 

Table 5.7: Applications used by members of special-education support teams to promote 
the development of skills 

ReadingWritingNumeracyPresentationMotor sensoryCommunicationProblem-solving and analyticalReferencing and researchSocialBehavioural management
Content-rich 
software 72% 37% 84% 15% 51% 46% 83% 16% 50% 44% 
Word-processing 67% 89% 25% 74% 63% 61% 16% 13% 37% 25% 
Reference 
software 30% 10% 5% 11% 10% 16% 28% 71% 9% 16% 
Painting and 
drawing programs 8% 12% 5% 40% 40% 15% 5% 4% 15% 31% 
Internet 19% 4% 8% 12% 5% 18% 16% 45% 24% 6% 
Assistive technology 
software 26% 18% 16% 11% 21% 23% 7% 4% 7% 16% 
Presentation 16% 16% 0 26% 6% 18% 0 5% 13% 9% 
Graphics programs 7% 11% 1% 21% 2% 13% 2% 9% 15% 6% 
Multimedia 7% 6% 3% 11% 6% 13% 4% 4% 13% 0 
E-mail 6% 7% 3% 4% 2% 16% 2% 13% 13% 0 
Spreadsheets 2% 1% 6% 6% 0 2% 5% 11% 0 3% 
Other 4% 1% 3% 0 3% 2% 2% 2% 2% 3% 
Databases 2% 0 1% 1% 0 5% 0 4% 0 3% 
Programming or 
scripting 0 0 1% 0 3% 0 0 2% 2% 0 
n (valid) 110 103 80 73 67 61 57 56 46 32 

60 Care should be taken when interpreting the percentages from this table, as sample sizes are low. Only 14 % of respondents were 
considered to be support teachers. 

130 



ICT and teaching and learning in primary schools Chapter 5 
Furthermore, table 5.8 reveals that those members of special-education support teams surveyed 
made prominent use of word-processing and content-rich software to facilitate teaching and 
learning in the different priority areas. 

Table 5.8: Most frequently used applications to promote the development of individual 
learning priority areas 

Skills Applications 
Reading skills Word-processing, content-rich software 
Writing skills Word-processing 
Numeracy skills Content-rich software 
Presentation skills Word-processing, painting and drawing programs 
Motor sensory skills Word-processing, content-rich software, painting and drawing programs 
Communication skills Word-processing, content-rich software 
Problem-solving skills Content-rich software 
Referencing and research skills Reference software 
Social skills Content-rich software 
Behavioural management skills Content-rich software 

However, this reliance on content-rich software and word-processing suggests that the full potential 
of ICT is not being realised in special-education support settings. Teachers should explore the 
possibility of making greater use of other applications such as exploratory, reference and assistive 
technology software with students with special educational needs 

5.4.6 Quality of provision 
Inspectors were asked to describe the quality of ICT in special-education support settings during 
WSE evaluations. Their observations on the quality of use of ICT in teaching and learning, as 
illustrated in fig. 5.14, show a range of quality in provision. A third of the observations reveal very 
little or inappropriate use, or no use, of ICT in the classroom. Another 38% of the observations 
reveal scope for development. Approximately 29% of the observations stated that there was a 
competent or optimal level of performance in the special-education setting. The proportion of 
observations rated “competent” or “optimal” was higher (36%) for schools with a high SCR. 

131 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
Fig. 5.14: Inspectors’ ratings of the quality of use of ICT in teaching and learning observed 
in special-education support settings 

60% 
40% 
20% 
0% 
33% 
38% 
23% 
6% 
No, very little, or Scope for Competent Optimal level of 
inappropriate use of ICT development practice performance 

Base: All speacial education team observations (n=71) 

Inspectors’ ratings of the quality of use of ICT in teaching and learning in special-education support 
settings are comparable, for the most part, with ratings on the use of ICT in mainstream classes. 
However, as table 5.9 shows, slightly more special-education support settings were allocated a 
“competent” or “optimal” rating (29%, compared with 24%). 

Table 5.9: Comparison of inspectors’ ratings of the quality of ICT provision in supporting 
children with special educational needs in mainstream and special-education support 
settings 

Mainstream settings and special classes Special-education support settings 
Very little or inappropriate use 

34% 

33% 

Scope for development 

42% 

38% 

Competent or optimal use 

24% 

29% 

Inspectors also provided some comments on the quality of use of ICT in teaching and learning in the 
special-education support context in line with their ratings. These comments, a sample of which are 
provided in table 5.10, suggest that quality of provision is mainly constrained by lack of resources, 
lack of planning and timetabling, and lack of competence on the part of teachers. The accessibility 
of such resources as computer applications would appear to be an important factor influencing 
provision. Where competent practice was identified, the inspectors drew attention to the integration 
of ICT in learning and the learning benefits that accrue from ICT-related activity. 

132 



ICT and teaching and learning in primary schools Chapter 5 
Table 5.10: Sample of inspectors’ comments on the quality of ICT use in special-education 
support settings 

Rating Comment 
Very little use, or inappropriate There is potential for more frequent and structured use of ICT to support the development 
use, of ICT of students’ literacy and numeracy skill. While a laptop computer has been purchased to 
support the work of learning support, it was not available or in use in the classroom during 
the inspection period. It is mainly used to support teachers’ planning and preparation. 
Scope for development The activity noted took the form of games only. The work was done independently, with 
little verbal interaction between teacher and student to ascertain whether understanding 
was deepening. 
Competent practice Teacher has a broad range of software to support her work with individual students and 
groups of students in a learning-support role. Hardware and software positioned in a very 
easily accessed corner. 
Optimal level of performance Excellent work done, where ICT is an integral part of the teaching and learning that takes 
place. A wide range of software used, and the work done is very well integrated in all 
curricular areas. 

Inspectors’ reports on case-study schools suggest that there are some good practices in the use of 
ICT to support children with special educational needs, but that these are not widespread. For 
example, inspectors commented favourably on effective use of ICT to promote creative writing, the 
development of project skills, independent learning, social skills, and co-ordination or motor skills. 
The use of creative writing software was also reported as a useful means of managing the teaching 
of a range of abilities within a group. 

In general, it is clear that there are some good practices in ICT use to facilitate teaching and learning 
in special-education settings but that there is also significant room for development. 

5.5 Assessment 
While the evaluation found some evidence of administrative use of ICT by teachers during the 
assessment of students, it found limited evidence of teachers engaging in the assessment of ICT-
related activity and its impact on teaching and learning. More than two-fifths (42%) of teachers 
interviewed as part of classroom inspections during WSEs said that they used ICT to record students’ 
progress. Only 12% of respondents in the survey of teachers, however, reported that they had 
attempted to assess the impact of ICT on teaching and learning. Of the teachers who attempted to 
assess the impact of the use of ICT on teaching and learning in the class, 46% reported using 
observation, while 22% reported using an assessment test. An analysis of inspectors’ reports on 
case-study schools also illustrates the lack of attention to assessment of students’ progress in ICT-
related activity throughout the curriculum. 

133 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
It is clear that very little assessment of ICT-related activity takes place in primary school classrooms, 
which is critical, given that assessment, followed by planning, is the starting-point for improving the 
use of ICT in teaching and learning. Recent evaluations of the implementation of the curriculum 
reveal that this lack of attention to assessment is not confined to ICT. The ICT framework from the 
NCCA should help to address this deficit with regard to assessment of the use of ICT in the 
curriculum. However, given the difficulties that teachers have with assessment, it is very important 
that training be provided to facilitate the effective use of the framework and its assessment 
mechanisms. 

5.6 Developing ICT in the classroom 
The evaluation identified factors that both constrain and facilitate the development of ICT in primary 
classrooms. It is important that schools take account of these issues and work towards overcoming 
the constraining factors and building on those factors that contribute to the development of ICT. 

5.6.1 Factors that constrain the development of ICT in the 
curriculum 
In their reports on case-study schools, inspectors commented on the factors that constrained the 
development of ICT in schools. The main factors related to poor infrastructure and lack of technical 
support, low levels of competence and confidence on the part of teachers, insufficient time and 
funding, and planning-related issues. Respondents in the survey of teachers also reported 
infrastructural issues and lack of time as factors constraining the use of ICT in teaching and learning. 

5.6.2 Factors that facilitate the development of ICT in the 
curriculum 
The most prominent factors facilitating the development of ICT in the curriculum include the 
knowledge, enthusiasm, competence and experience of the teacher. The availability of appropriate 
and accessible professional development clearly has a critical role to play in developing teachers’ 
skills and confidence in the use of ICT. While teachers’ attitudes and competence are crucial, it is 
also essential that they have ready access to functioning hardware and appropriate software. In this 
regard, access to the internet and the availability of suitable peripherals are important factors in 
facilitating the development of ICT in the classroom. 

In the responses to their survey, teachers emphasised the ready availability of quality hardware in 
sufficient quantity as a central factor. An analysis of the responses to this survey also suggests that 
more experienced teachers gave priority to teacher training in ICT, while younger teachers gave 
priority to the improved use of existing hardware and software in teaching and the updating of 
specific software. 

134 



ICT and teaching and learning in primary schools Chapter 5 
Adequate funding is clearly an issue in relation to the provision of resources, including both 
hardware and software. The grants provided to schools by the DES were recognised by teachers as 
making a significant contribution to the development of their school’s resources. However, as 
reported in chapter 1, schools find it necessary to supplement these grants through fund-raising and 
other local contributions. As the availability of resources continues to be a constraining factor on the 
development of ICT in schools, it must be concluded that additional funding for the development of 
schools’ ICT infrastructure is required. 

5.7 Findings and recommendations 
5.7.1 Main findings 
Teachers’ confidence and competence in the use of ICT 

• Only 30% of primary teachers rated their ability either “intermediate” or “advanced” with 
regard to using teaching and learning methods that are facilitated by ICT. Younger or more 
recently qualified teachers had a higher perception of their ICT skills than more experienced 
teachers. 

Incidence of ICT use 

• At primary level, inspectors reported evidence of the use of ICT to facilitate teaching and learning 
in 59% of classroom observations carried out as part of WSEs. However, they observed ICT 
actually used in only 22% of the lessons observed. 

Integration of ICT in teaching and learning 

• ICT is mainly used for the development of students’ writing, reading and numeracy skills. 
However, even this use of ICT is infrequent. 

• There is limited integration of ICT in the classroom. Where it is used, ICT predominates in core 
curricular areas, such as English and Mathematics, and SESE 

• There is limited use of ICT for the development of higher-order thinking skills, creative skills, social 
skills, independent working skills, and communication skills. 

• Students in junior classes experience a narrower range of ICT activity than their counterparts in 
senior classes. 

• Greater use is made of individual approaches to ICT-related activity than of paired, group or 
whole-class approaches. 

135 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
• The evaluation found limited evidence of teachers engaging in the assessment of ICT-related 
activity in their classrooms or of its impact on teaching and learning. 

Students’ ICT use and competence 

• Most students reported being able to perform many basic computer tasks, such as turning a 
computer on and off or opening and saving a file. 

• More than 30% reported that they could not create a document, print a document, or log on to 
the internet, or would need help to do so. 

• The majority of students did not know how to create a presentation, use a spreadsheet, or send 
an attachment with an e-mail message. 

Use of resources 

• There is a reliance on computer applications in both mainstream and special-education classes to 
facilitate the use of ICT in teaching and learning. This use is mainly for the consolidation of 
numeracy and literacy skills. 

• While 69% of teachers reported using internet resources in planning and preparing for their 
teaching, fewer than a quarter (24%) use the internet in classroom practice. 

• There is very limited use of peripherals in primary schools, apart perhaps from the printer. 

Quality of provision 

• Inspectors were asked to describe the quality of the use of ICT in the teaching and learning they 
observed during the inspection period in classrooms visited. Only a quarter of inspectors’ reports 
on classroom observations suggest a competent or optimal level of performance. This proportion 
was higher for senior classes than for junior classes. 

Special-education settings 

• Approximately half the mainstream teachers reported using ICT to assist students with special 
educational needs in mainstream settings. A significantly higher use was reported by members of 
schools’ special-education support teams. 

• ICT is mainly used in special-education settings to develop reading, writing and numeracy skills, 
with the most common applications used being word-processing and content-rich software. 

• Inspectors’ observations of the use of ICT during classroom inspections suggest a range of quality 
of provision in special-education settings, with only a third of instances rated “competent” or 
“optimal.” 

136 



ICT and teaching and learning in primary schools Chapter 5 
Factors constraining the use of ICT 

• Factors constraining the development of ICT in the curriculum include poor infrastructure and 
technical support, lack of competence or confidence on the part of teachers in the use of ICT, 
and funding. 

Factors facilitating the development of ICT 

• Factors facilitating the development of ICT in the curriculum include knowledge, competence and 
experience on the part of the teacher and access to functioning hardware, as well as funding. 

5.7.2 Recommendations 
Recommendations for policy-makers and policy advisors 

Teachers need to be supported in meeting the challenge of effectively integrating ICT in their 
classroom practices so that Irish classrooms can be placed at the forefront of advances in teaching 
practices and students’ learning techniques. This can be done in the following ways: 

• Consideration should be given to ensuring that teachers are provided with opportunities to 
develop skills that are directly applicable to the use of ICT in the classroom. This should be 
addressed in a strategic way through a combination of pre-service, induction and in-service 
training methods. 

• It is critical that teachers receive training in how to engage with the forthcoming “Framework for 
ICT in Curriculum and Assessment” to be published by the NCCA. 

• Education departments in third-level colleges should consider giving priority to the integration of 
ICT in the different curricular areas when preparing students for teaching. 

• It is important that classroom organisational matters be emphasised in support materials and 
courses for teachers so that they can exploit potential opportunities for using ICT in the 
classroom in accordance with the resources available. 

Recommendations for schools 

Teachers’ confidence and competence in using ICT 

• Schools should endeavour to adopt mechanisms to facilitate the sharing of good practice among 
members of the staff. For example, teachers who make effective use of ICT could act as mentors 
to colleagues who are not as confident in their use of the technology. 

• Teachers should be encouraged to become more critically reflective of their classroom practice, 
particularly their practice with regard to ICT. 

137 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
Integration of ICT in teaching and learning 

• Schools should endeavour to provide all their students with an appropriate and equitable level of 
experience of ICT at all class levels. 

• Continuous efforts should be made in schools to develop the level of teachers’ access to ICT 
equipment. The provision of internet access in classrooms and access to a school network should 
be a priority for schools. The relevant DES grants will help facilitate this provision. 

• Teachers should regularly review their use of ICT with a view to expanding their repertoire of 
teaching strategies, including opportunities for students’ engagement with the technology. 

• Schools and teachers should make greater use of ICT to differentiate the implementation of the 
curriculum within the mainstream classroom. 

• Teachers should fully exploit the potential of ICT to facilitate the development of students’ literacy 
and numeracy skills. 

• Teachers should exploit the potential of ICT to develop a range of skills in students, including 
research and collaborative skills, creative writing skills, communication skills, and the higher-order 
skills of analysis, evaluation, and problem-solving. 

Resources 

• Schools should explore the use of as wide a range of resources and applications as possible, 
including educational software, peripherals, e-mail, presentation software, Scoilnet, the NCTE 
web site, and the internet. Schools could consider drawing up an inventory of software in 
accordance with its suitability for class levels and curricular applications. The NCTE’s Software 
Central web site, which provides advice and support to teachers on the use of software in their 
classrooms, is a useful resource in this regard. 

Special-education settings 

• In using ICT as a teaching aid for students with special educational needs, schools should 
endeavour to ensure that it is being used to support the widest range of students’ needs 
possible, both within classrooms and in withdrawal settings. 

• Schools should exploit the benefits of ICT in their assessment procedures and practices beyond 
purely administrative functions. This could include using ICT to assess, track and analyse students’ 
progress, using appropriate applications. 

138 



ICT and teaching and learning in post-primary schools 
Chapter 6 
139ICT and teaching and learning in post-primary schools 
Chapter 6 
139

ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
6.1 Introduction 
This chapter deals with ICT and its contribution to the teaching and learning process in post-primary 
school classrooms. It begins by looking at teachers’ ICT qualifications and skills as a means of 
exploring the level of their familiarity with the relevant technology and its applications. It also looks 
at the present extent of students’ use of ICT as a means of determining their ICT skill levels. 

The chapter then turns to addressing how ICT is used at present in classrooms. Firstly, the nature of 
dedicated ICT lessons is examined. A number of areas are examined in detail, including the support 
that school principals give to the use of ICT in the classroom, the extent of ICT facilities in 
classrooms, the focus, organisation and frequency of its use, teaching activities that incorporate ICT, 
the extent of its use in different subjects, the quality of its provision, and its impact on the teaching 
and learning process. The use of ICT in special education settings and in assessment are also 
considered. Finally, the chapter identifies factors that contribute to the successful integration of ICT 
in classrooms, as well as those that tend to constrain its development. 

140 



ICT and teaching and learning in post-primary schools Chapter 6 
6.2 ICT qualifications and skills 
This section examines teachers’ ICT skills and qualification levels as well as students’ ICT skills levels. 
It draws primarily on the findings of the national surveys of teachers and students. 

6.2.1 Teachers’ ICT qualifications and skill levels 
An analysis of the survey of teachers showed that approximately 6% of post-primary teachers had a 
postgraduate qualification in ICT in education, while a further 12% had other informal 
qualifications in ICT.61 The survey showed that teachers of Business Studies (33%), science subjects 
(26%), Mathematics (25%) and the applied science subjects (24%) were most likely to have such 
qualifications. 

When other academic qualifications in ICT are included, a substantial 25% of all post-primary 
teachers reported having a qualification in ICT.62 Of the 737 teachers who reported that they had 
the higher diploma in education (HDipEd), only 213, or 29%, reported that they studied a module 
in ICT as part of this qualification; this increased to 60% of all teachers under the age of thirty-five. 

This higher figure for younger teachers would seem to suggest a growing shift on the part of 
teacher educators to equipping trainee teachers with the necessary ICT skills to enable them to use 
ICT as part of their teaching methods in the classroom. This shift is perhaps in response to, among 
other things, the wider repertoire of teaching methods that ICT makes possible, to the impact that it 
can have on teaching and learning, and to the pervasiveness of ICT in schools. Teacher education 
departments in third-level colleges should consider giving priority to the study of a module on ICT in 
education for students following a postgraduate diploma in education course. Indeed the study of 
ICT in education should be given priority within the course content of any teaching qualification 
provided by teacher educators. 

The questionnaire for teachers also asked respondents to state their perceived level of proficiency in 
a number of ICT skills areas.63 The responses were arranged in descending order of proficiency, as 
shown in table 6.1, by combining “intermediate” and “advanced” from the principal variables of 
teacher’s age group, gender, and SCR.64 

The highest levels of perceived proficiency were in use of the internet, e-mail, and word-processing, 
where more than half the teachers rated their proficiency as “intermediate” or “advanced.” The 
lowest level was for programming and scripting, assistive technology, and careers software: fewer 
than 10% reported an intermediate or advanced level of proficiency in these areas. Again it is 
noteworthy that teachers under thirty-five considered themselves to be more proficient in practically 
all ICT skills areas, especially the internet, e-mail, word-processing, and presentation. The proficiency 

61 “Informal qualifications” refers to such courses as the European Computer Driving Licence (ECDL). 

62 Other academic qualifications in ICT might include a BSc in computer science or a BEng in computer engineering. 

63 Respondents were able to state their level of proficiency in the different skill areas as “none,” “basic,” “intermediate,” or 
“advanced.” 

64 See note 19 (chapter 2) for a definition of SCR. 

141 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
of teachers of Irish in most skills areas was noticeably lower than that reported by teachers of other 
subjects. 

Table 6.1: Proportion of post-primary teachers who rated their proficiency in ICT skills as 
either “intermediate” or “advanced” 

Age Gender SCR 
Under 35 35–45 Over 45 Male Female Low High Total 
Internet 

84% 

60% 

55% 

70% 

66% 

66% 

68% 

66% 

E-mail 

81% 

58% 

50% 

66% 

62% 

61% 

66% 

63% 

Word-processing 

76% 

57% 

52% 

61% 

61% 

58% 

65% 

61% 

Presentation 

59% 

33% 

30% 

43% 

41% 

41% 

43% 

42% 

Operating systems 

51% 

32% 

29% 

42% 

37% 

37% 

39% 

38% 

Spreadsheets 

46% 

30% 

29% 

39% 

33% 

34% 

37% 

35% 

File management 

42% 

26% 

29% 

38% 

30% 

30% 

35% 

33% 

Reference software 

39% 

31% 

29% 

36% 

32% 

33% 

33% 

33% 

Graphics programs 

41% 

24% 

25% 

36% 

28% 

30% 

31% 

31% 

Databases 

34% 

22% 

22% 

27% 

26% 

26% 

26% 

27% 

Multimedia 

33% 

19% 

16% 

30% 

19% 

23% 

22% 

23% 

Troubleshooting 

25% 

16% 

17% 

26% 

16% 

20% 

18% 

20% 

Content-rich software 

18% 

13% 

21% 

20% 

16% 

17% 

20% 

18% 
Exploratory software65 

20% 

13% 

16% 

21% 

14% 

16% 

19% 

17% 

Networking 

14% 

10% 

9% 

14% 

10% 

9% 

12% 

11% 

Data-logging software 

13% 

8% 

9% 

13% 

10% 

9% 

11% 

11% 

Drawing programs 

13% 

14% 

6% 

19% 

6% 

11% 

9% 

10% 

Careers software 

7% 

6% 

9% 

6% 

9% 

7% 

7% 

8% 

Assistive technology software 

8% 

7% 

6% 

9% 

7% 

4% 

9% 

7% 

Programming or scripting 

10% 

5% 

5% 

8% 

6% 

7% 

7% 

7% 

n 

272 

210 

290 

260 

468 

323 

321 

800 

The survey also explored how often teachers used these ICT skills (by means of a range of 
applications) in their teaching. The internet (79%) and word-processing (79%), as fig. 6.1 shows, 
were the most popular applications used by teachers. Furthermore, the teachers who used these 
applications revealed a high level of proficiency in each application (i.e. at least 86% of teachers 
who use the applications had at least an intermediate level of knowledge of these applications).66 
On the other hand, teachers who reported using reference (for example encyclopaedias), content-
rich and exploratory software in their teaching had a relatively low level of proficiency. 

The findings also reveal that in many instances the level of reported proficiency was not reflected in 
the actual use of the application. The relatively low level of use in classroom practice of e-mail, 
spreadsheets, graphics programs and databases, for example, does not reflect teachers’ high levels 

65 Exploratory software can be described as simulation-type software, usually subject-specific but with a high level of interactivity. 
66 Note: The “proficiency of user” scale in fig. 6.1 is based on the small number of teachers (15) who stated that they used these 
applications in their teaching. 

142 



ICT and teaching and learning in post-primary schools Chapter 6 
100% 75% 50% 25% 100% 75%50%25%0% 
79% 
79% 
59% 
47% 
42% 
41% 
36% 
35% 
31% 
30% 
25% 
21% 
16% 
16% 
12% 
6% 
88% 
86% 
87% 
59% 
90% 
79% 
52% 
77% 
71% 
57% 
68% 
65% 
73% 
63% 
43% 
47% 
of proficiency in these applications. It can be assumed, therefore, that other factors, such as 
teachers’ motivation or computer access, may influence the transfer of teachers’ competence in 
particular applications to classroom practice. 

Fig. 6.1: Proficiency and use of applications in teaching 

Internet 
Word-processing 
Presentation 
Reference software 
E-mail 
Spreadsheets 
Content-rich software 
Graphics packages 
Databases 
Exploratory software 
Multimedia 
Datalogging software 
Drawing packages 
Careers software 
Assistive technology software 
Programming/scripting 


Usage in Teaching (at least once) 
Proficiency of User (Intermediate or Advanced) 
Base: Usage is based on teachers using applications in their teaching (n > 247) 
Proficiency is based on teachers using applications in their teaching (n > 15) 

Teachers were also asked in their survey to rate their ability at different tasks related to the 
application of ICT and related materials in the classroom. Table 6.2 shows that slightly more than a 
quarter (26%) of all teachers rated their ability as “intermediate” or “advanced” in relation to using 
teaching and learning methods that are facilitated by ICT. A similar proportion (27%) rated their 
ability as “intermediate” or “advanced” in relation to assessing the quality of educational software 
to facilitate teaching and learning, while four out of ten (40%) reported their ability to assess the 
quality of internet material to facilitate teaching and learning to be at that level. 

143 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
Table 6.2: Proportions of post-primary teachers who rated their ability in each of three ICT 
tasks that facilitate teaching and learning as either “intermediate” or “advanced” 

Age Gender SCR 
Under 35 35–45 Over 45 Male Female Low High Total 
Using teaching and learning 

38% 

19% 

22% 

30% 

25% 

26% 

27% 

26% 
methods that are facilitated 
by ICT 
Assessing the quality of 

33% 

20% 

27% 

30% 

25% 

27% 

28% 

27% 
educational software to 
facilitate teaching and 
learning 
Assessing the quality of 

54% 

30% 

33% 

40% 

40% 

37% 

43% 

40% 
internet material to facilitate 
teaching and learning 
n 

272 

210 

290 

260 

468 

323 

321 

800 

The perceived ability level in all three tasks was higher for teachers aged thirty-five or under; but it is 
interesting to note that while the reported ability levels decreased somewhat for the 35–45 group 
they increased again for the over-45 category. This trend is also apparent from table 6.1 in perceived 
levels of proficiency in the areas of content-rich and exploratory software. This increase in skills level 
could be correlated with length of teaching experience. There was a negligible difference between 
the stated ability of teachers in schools with a low or high SCR. It is noteworthy that teachers of 
Irish, English and the subjects in the social studies II group (Religious Education, Physical Education, 
CSPE, and SPHE) provided a lower than average rating in each of the three ICT tasks. 

As mentioned earlier, the survey found that 25% of teachers had a qualification in ICT. For the 75% 
who had no such qualification it can be deduced that their main means towards mastering the 
technology and its application was through their own enthusiasm for ICT and self-learning, or by 
availing of relevant professional development courses. The survey also found that, apart from the 
internet, e-mail, and word-processing, the majority of teachers–those with and without formal ICT 
qualifications–stated that they did not consider themselves to be proficient in an entire range of ICT 
skills and applications. 

Finally, significant numbers of teachers rated their ability in each of the three ICT tasks that facilitate 
teaching and learning (see table 6.2) as basic or stated that had no ability in the area. 

In general, the findings show that significant numbers of teachers lack intermediate-level ICT skills 
or better (table 6.1). This impedes them in integrating the technology in their teaching practice. 
Furthermore, of those who consider themselves to have these skill levels, many declare themselves 

144 



ICT and teaching and learning in post-primary schools Chapter 6 ICT and teaching and learning in post-primary schools Chapter 6 
unaware of how to apply them so as to facilitate improved teaching and learning (table 6.2). Also, 
younger teachers perceive themselves to have higher levels of proficiency in a range of ICT skills 
than more established teachers. While this may reflect changes taking place in teacher education, it 
may also reflect the pervasiveness of technology in younger people’s lives. If ICT is to be effectively 
integrated in the teaching and learning process it is apparent that these issues will need to be 
addressed in a strategic way, through, for example, a combination of pre-service, induction and in-
service training. 

6.2.2 Students’ ICT skill levels 
In general, the evaluation found that fifth-year students have a positive attitude towards the use of 
computers. There was a negligible difference between the attitudes of those in schools with a low 
SCR and those in schools with a high SCR. In their questionnaire, students were asked to state how 
frequently they used computers to perform certain tasks. Fig. 6.2 shows that more than three-
quarters (77%) of respondents specified that they used the internet to look up information at least 
twice a month. More than half (53%) reported using the internet to download music at least twice 
a month. 

145 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
Fig. 6.2: Students’ use of computers 

How often do you use: 

The internet to look up information 
Word-processing 
Games on a computer 
Drawing or graphics programs on a computer 
The internet to download music 
The computer to help you learn school material 
E-mail 
The internet to download software (games) 
The internet to collaborate with a group or team 
Spreadsheets 
The computer for programming 
Educational software such as Maths programs 

80%60% 100%40%20%0% 
43% 34% 18% 
25%29%34% 
30% 26% 22% 
35%23%14% 
30% 23% 15% 
26%25%15% 
33% 14% 18% 
21%22%18% 
13% 16% 20% 
29%13%6% 
8% 13% 19% 
17%12%4% 
At least once a week 

About 2/3 times a month 

Less than twice a month 

Base: All post-primary students (n = 450) 

Responses also showed that students used a computer to perform the following activities at least 
twice a month: word-processing (63% of respondents), games (56%), and e-mail (47%). There was 
a negligible difference in how often those in schools with a low SCR performed these tasks 
compared with those in schools with a high SCR. This may be explained by the fact that schools 
with a high SCR were generally larger, where access to centralised computer rooms was more 
favourable. 

Students were also specifically asked to state what kinds of tasks they used computers for at school. 
The most frequent replies were research on the internet (71%), word-processing (62%), and general 
IT skills, for example file administration (32%). As will be seen in section 6.3.2, these are strikingly 
similar to the topics commonly taught in schools’ dedicated ICT lessons. Nearly two-thirds (64%) 
reported using a computer to help them with their homework. However, only 19% of these did this 
at least once a week. This is perhaps an area that could be exploited further by schools and 
teachers, as some 89% of students reported having access to a computer at home. 

Interestingly, 36% of students surveyed stated that they learnt most about computers by teaching 
themselves (45% stating that they taught themselves how to use the internet), while 33% stated 

146 



ICT and teaching and learning in post-primary schools Chapter 6 
that they learnt most through their teachers. Those in schools with a low SCR were more likely to 
use a computer for recreational use (32%) or e-mail (22%) than those in schools with a high SCR 
(19% for recreation, 13% for e-mail). More students in schools with a high SCR stated that they 
were using computers to work with word-processing, presentation, and other applications. 

Students also reported on how well they could perform certain tasks. As can be seen from fig. 6.3, 
they were confident that they could undertake many basic operations by themselves, for example 
saving, printing, deleting, opening and editing documents. It was found that, with some assistance, 
they could generally perform more complicated tasks, such as moving files, copying files to external 
storage devices, and writing and sending e-mail. A relatively low proportion, however, reported 
being able to create a multimedia presentation. It was found that they would require most help to 
attach a file to an e-mail message, construct a web page, or deal with computer viruses. 

Fig. 6.3: Students’ ICT skill levels 

How frequently do you use the following? 

Get on to the internet 
Print a document or file 
Save a document or file 
Delete a document or file 
Open a file 
Play computer games 
Scroll through a document on a screen 
Start a computer game 
Draw pictures using a mouse 
Create/edit a document 
Move files from one place to another 
Copy or download files from the internet 
Write and send e-mails 
Copy a file from a CD / memory stick / floppy disk 
Use a database 
Attach a file to an e-mail message 
Create a presentation 
Create a multi-media presentation 
Use software to find/get rid of computer viruses 
Construct a web page 


0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 
98% 
96% 
98% 
95% 
95% 
95% 
93% 5% 
92% 6% 
91% 6% 
87% 10% 
71% 21% 
68% 22% 
70% 18% 
68% 20% 
42% 36% 
38% 28% 
40% 26% 
27% 36% 
30% 29% 
14% 34% 
I can do this very well by myself 
I can do this with help from someone 
Base: All post-primary students (n = 450) 

147 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
When developing ICT courses, schools should take account of students’ previous ICT knowledge 
and skills, with a view to expanding and consolidating their repertoire of skills. This entails tracking 
the development of their ICT skills through their post-primary schooling and planning the content of 
dedicated ICT lessons accordingly. Little emphasis (as will be seen in section 6.3) is placed on more 
complicated ICT tasks during students’ experience of ICT in their classrooms. 

Interviews conducted by inspectors with fifth-year students in case-study schools revealed that they 
used computers mainly in the social studies I group of subjects (History, Geography, Art, Craft and 
Design, Music), in the LCVP link modules, and, unsurprisingly, in dedicated computer lessons. 
Inspectors also observed examples of work done by these students during evaluations. It was 
common for the work displayed to relate to the LCVP link modules or LCA tasks. One report 
described the work observed as follows: 

Students presented examples of work they had produced using different software packages. These 
included word-processing to produce curricula vitae and questionnaires, Excel for problem solving in 
Mathematics and to produce timetables and lists of teams for sports, Publisher to produce notices and 
Paint to produce images which they then incorporated into the Publisher documents. The students 
interviewed were able to talk knowledgeably about the work they had done. They were also able to 
discuss [the] functionality of software that was not demonstrated in the work shown and could suggest 
likely locations within menus for functions with which they were not familiar. 

Another report mentioned that 

examples of word-processing, as well as digital camera work undertaken as part of their work for Art, 
Craft and Design lessons, were made available for examination. The work observed was of a high quality 
and students were able to hold a discussion about it in a capable and confident manner. 

There was a strong correlation between the samples of students’ work observed by inspectors and 
those activities students performed most often (as shown in fig. 6.2), as well as the tasks for which 
they reported themselves as being most proficient (as shown in fig. 6.3). 

In general, the quality of the students’ ICT work observed in schools was described in very positive 
terms by inspectors. In all the reports in which students’ work was commented on it was mentioned 
that they were capable of discussing it in a competent and confident manner. Nevertheless, it was 
also clear that the range of work observed was somewhat limited. It is recommended, therefore, 
that teachers broaden the range or type of ICT work that they cover with students. 

6.3 Dedicated ICT lessons 
This section begins by examining how dedicated ICT lessons are timetabled, with particular 
reference to levels of provision in both the junior and the senior cycle. It also refers to the curriculum 
that schools implement during these lessons. 

148 



ICT and teaching and learning in post-primary schools Chapter 6 
6.3.1 Timetabling of dedicated ICT lessons 
In their national survey, school principals were asked to provide details about all timetabled 
dedicated ICT lessons in their schools. Table 6.3 provides details of the provision of these lessons in 
110 post-primary schools. 

Table 6.3: Timetabled dedicated ICT lessons in post-primary schools 

First year Second year Third year Transition Year Leaving Leaving 
Certificate Certificate 
year 1 year 2 
Proportion of schools 70% 45% 35% 62% 69% 66% 
that timetabled ICT 
lessons 
Average number of 1 1 1 4 2 2 
lesson periods per week 

Base: All post-primary schools with timetabled ICT lessons (n = 110). 

The proportion of schools that timetabled ICT lessons fell from 70% to 35% from first year to third 
year (that is, as the Junior Certificate examination drew closer for students, their exposure to 
dedicated ICT lessons ceased in many schools). The average number of lesson periods per week 
throughout the three years of the junior cycle was one. However, the proportion of schools that 
timetabled ICT lessons increased to more than 60% of all schools for senior cycle students 
(Transition Year and Leaving Certificate). For Leaving Certificate students in particular, the high 
proportions were attributed primarily to the LCVP and LCA programmes. The average number of 
lesson periods was greater in the senior cycle than in the junior cycle, especially for Transition Year 
students. 

A similar pattern in the provision of dedicated ICT lessons was found in the case-study schools. In 
the majority of inspectors’ reports, junior cycle students were reported as not being timetabled with 
any dedicated ICT lessons. In such instances the school management usually commented that these 
lessons had been dropped as a result of timetabling pressures to provide access to new junior cycle 
subjects. In other schools, ICT lessons had been reduced to one lesson period per week in first or 
second year, with no provision in third year. It was clear from reports that the majority of case-study 
schools concentrated on providing their students with dedicated ICT lessons in their Transition Year, 
LCVP, or LCA. 

The Transition Year programme was provided in 14 of the 20 case-study schools visited. Dedicated 
ICT lessons formed part of the programme in most of these schools. Problems arose, however, in 
schools where the Transition Year was an optional programme and students had chosen to transfer 
directly to the established Leaving Certificate programme. In a number of these schools, students 

149 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
expressed concern about the fact that they were not provided with any dedicated ICT lessons. In 
contrast, those who had opted for the Transition Year, or for either the LCVP or LCA, had 
significantly greater access to dedicated ICT lessons. ICT lessons in the Transition Year usually took 
the form of a discrete ICT module, the content of which varied from the completion of the 
European Computer Driving Licence (ECDL) programme to desktop publishing or web design. While 
teachers generally viewed the ECDL as a comprehensive and well-recognised qualification, they also 
reported that it had some pitfalls. It necessitated, for example, significant numbers of timetabled 
lessons per week, it required refresher courses to be completed at future intervals, and it was costly. 

Transition Year students in all the case-study schools were frequently exposed to ICT in ways other 
than dedicated ICT lessons. Many Transition Year activities, for example, involved students using ICT 
(for example the production of publicity material about a school show or the production of a school 
memorial calendar). 

The LCVP was provided in 16 of the 20 case-study schools. Students are required to study two link 
modules as part of this programme.67 In essence, it was this requirement that encouraged these 
schools to furnish their students with lessons in a computer room, with many even facilitating them 
with access to computers outside timetabled lesson time. Students are part-assessed in these link 
modules by means of a portfolio of work, and the items for inclusion in this portfolio require the use 
of ICT for both their research and their presentation.68 It was interesting to note that during 
interviews with fifth-year students in case-study schools it was predominantly those following the 
LCVP who stood out as being able to speak most about their use of ICT in school. These students 
were also more likely to show inspectors samples of their work. (This issue is examined further in 
section 6.4.2.) 

The LCA requires all candidates to study a mandatory introductory module on ICT. It also requires 
the provision of access to ICT within the subjects provided on the programme, and there is also a 
significant cross-curricular aspect to ICT. Furthermore, LCA students have an option to study a 
vocational specialism in ICT as part of the programme; if they opt for this they are required to study 
four modules out of a possible six.69 LCA students are assessed through the presentation of tasks, 
and these are normally presented using ICT. For these reasons the programme was found to 
stimulate a significant integration of ICT in classroom activities in the 11 of the 20 case-study 
schools that were found to offer the programme. It was clear that these schools had embraced the 
use of ICT as an integral aspect of teaching and learning within the programme. LCA students 
interviewed were competent and confident in discussing their use of ICT within subjects and in the 
completion of tasks and assignments. The quality of tasks and assignments was described in one 
evaluation report as showing “good range and breadth,” while in another they were described as 
being of a “high quality” and “impressive.” 

67 Link modules: (1) Preparation for the World of Work and (2) Enterprise Education. 

68 There are four compulsory core items: a CV, a career investigation, a summary report, and an enterprise or action plan. Pupils must 
also submit any two of the four optional items: a diary of work experience, an enterprise report, a recorded interview or presentation, 
or a report on “My own place.” 

69 The six modules are word-processing, databases, spreadsheets, desktop publishing (page layout), internet, and text entry. 

150 



ICT and teaching and learning in post-primary schools Chapter 6 
The LCVP and LCA have both embraced the use of ICT in their curriculum, and this no doubt goes 
some way towards explaining the frequency with which they were noted in evaluation reports. The 
Transition Year programme makes possible a flexibility in approach and the use of alternative and 
additional teaching methods, and this may account for its strong association with the use of ICT by 
teachers and students. It was noted by some teachers that their experience of teaching Transition 
Year, LCA or LCVP had encouraged them to integrate ICT in their work with other classes not 
associated with these programmes. 

6.3.2 Curriculum and content of dedicated ICT lessons 
Approximately 17% of the 800 teachers surveyed stated that they taught ICT as a discrete subject in 
one or more of the junior cycle, Transition Year or Leaving Certificate programmes. These teachers 
were asked to state the kind of material they covered in these lessons. The topics found to be most 
frequently taught at each level are shown in table 6.4.70 

Table 6.4: Commonly taught topics in dedicated ICT lessons 

Junior cycle Transition Year Established LC LCA LCVP 
Most frequent 

Word-processing 

Word-processing 

Word-processing 

Word-processing 

Word-processing 

(83% of ICT teachers) 

(76% of ICT teachers) 

(74% of ICT teachers) 

(87% of ICT teachers) 

(93% of ICT teachers) 

Second most 

Internet 

Internet 

Spreadsheet 

Spreadsheet 

Internet 

frequent 

(65% of ICT teachers) 

(76% of ICT teachers) 

(64% of ICT teachers) 

(83% of ICT teachers) 

(46% of ICT teachers) 

Third most 

Spreadsheets 

Presentation 

Internet 

Internet 

Presentation 

frequent 

(61% of ICT teachers) 

(72% of ICT teachers) 

(62% of ICT teachers) 

(73% of ICT teachers) 

(37% of ICT teachers) 

n 

77 

58 

42 

30 

41 

An analysis of the survey also found that Computer Studies as a subject in the junior cycle (an 
optional and non-examination subject) was provided in only 13% of the 110 post-primary schools 
that responded.71 At Leaving Certificate level Computer Studies (again an optional and non-
examination subject) was provided in 23% of those schools.72 The syllabuses for these subjects are 
given in the Rules and Programme for Secondary Schools. At Leaving Certificate level, students who 
take Computer Studies and who perform satisfactorily are issued with a statement to that effect by 
the DES. The Department issued such statements to 5,419 students from 102 post-primary schools 
for the 2005/06 school year. With 50,995 sitting the established Leaving Certificate and LCVP in 735 
schools in 2006, it can be seen that a relatively small proportion (approximately 11%) received 
Computer Studies statements. 

70 Care must be taken when interpreting the results from this table, as sample sizes are low. 

71 Junior cycle computer studies was provided in 6 of the 31 vocational schools whose principals responded to the survey, in 8 of the 63 
secondary schools, and in none of the 16 community and comprehensive schools. 

72 Computer studies at the Leaving Certificate level was provided in 6 of the 31 vocational schools whose principals responded to the 
survey, in 16 of the 63 secondary schools, and in 2 of the 16 community and comprehensive schools. 

151 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
Further analysis of the survey of principals showed that this statement was not the only form of 
certification offered by schools. It was found, for example, that approximately 70% of schools 
surveyed provided ECDL courses, while 28% provided FETAC courses. Other forms of certification 
that were mentioned included Commercial Examination Board (CEB) certification and City and 
Guilds of London certification. 

The syllabuses for Computer Studies at the Leaving Certificate level and in the junior cycle, as 
contained in the Rules and Programme for Secondary Schools, are virtually unchanged since their 
introduction in 1980 and 1985, respectively.73 At this point, much of their content may be 
considered outdated. In the absence of a review, many schools, as alluded to above, have made 
other arrangements to provide students with a comprehensive and modern programme of study in 
ICT. The emphasis in these newer programmes is on covering popular computer applications, as 
distinct from the more detailed study of computing found in the Computer Studies syllabuses. Given 
the outdated nature of the syllabuses, the relatively low numbers of schools availing of the subject, 
and the dynamism of schools in devising and organising their own ICT curricular programmes, 
consideration now needs to be given to either removing these syllabuses from the Rules and 
Programme for Secondary Schools or reviewing them. This would be complemented by the 
application in schools of the “Framework for ICT in Curriculum and Assessment” at present being 
developed by the NCCA. (See chapter 1 for further details of this framework). Notwithstanding both 
these developments, schools would still need to be advised about what constitutes an appropriate 
education in ICT in the senior cycle. The NCCA, in collaboration with the NCTE, is best placed to 
advise schools on this issue. 

In general, the evaluation found a low level of provision of dedicated ICT lessons in the junior cycle. 
However, there is significant integration of ICT in the senior cycle Transition Year, LCVP, and LCA, 
including the provision of dedicated ICT lessons. It was also found that schools generally approach 
the organisation of these lessons differently. They can, for example, use one of a range of ICT 
programmes or syllabuses, as well as different forms of certification. While bearing in mind 
curricular and timetabling pressures, schools should endeavour to balance the ICT experience they 
plan to provide within a particular programme throughout the life span of that programme (for 
example the junior cycle or senior cycle). The NCCA “Framework for ICT in Curriculum and 
Assessment” will assist schools in this regard. In situations where this cannot be done by means of 
dedicated ICT lessons, other ways of providing access to ICT could be explored, for example the 
setting up of a school computer club. 

6.4 Classroom practice and ICT 
Inspectors completed ICT review schedules during 168 subject inspections carried out in 111 
schools. These review schedules comprised a short questionnaire on ICT issues. Some questions 

73 At the Leaving Certificate level schools devise their own syllabus, but the broad outlines of the subject are specified by the DES. 

152 



ICT and teaching and learning in post-primary schools Chapter 6 
were directed to the principal, while others were asked of the teacher (or teachers) of the subject (or 
subjects) being inspected. The questionnaire was completed in separate interviews with both 
principals and teachers. The review schedule also required the inspectors to comment on the 
integration of ICT in teaching and learning in the lessons observed. A total of 311 lessons were 
observed. 

6.4.1 School principals’ support for the use of ICT in the classroom 
Principals in each of the 111 schools visited reported to inspectors that some level of ICT resources 
was available to the subject (or subjects) being evaluated in their school. (The case-study school 
evaluations yielded a similar finding: the principals of all twenty schools visited claimed that each 
subject on their school’s curriculum had access to ICT facilities.) Inspectors were provided with 
various descriptions of these resources; these included the level of hardware available to a subject 
(such as the number of computers and peripherals) as well as the range of computer applications 
and the type of internet connection installed, if any. In some schools the ICT resources available for a 
subject were in the classroom while in others the subject inspected was described as being able to 
avail of the school’s general ICT facilities, such as the computer room. 

Principals were asked to distinguish between the resources available to a subject (or subjects) and 
those which were used in the teaching and learning of that subject (or subjects). Altogether, 60% of 
principals in the 111 schools visited reported that available resources were being used in the 
teaching and learning of subjects. These principals provided examples of how ICT resources were 
being employed; some of these are summarised in table 6.5. 

Table 6.5: Principals’ descriptions of how ICT is used in some subjects 

Example from school principal of how ICT resources are used in teaching and learning in this subject 
English Students use the internet for research. 
Science Used in the general preparation of materials and tests. One teacher is particularly skilled at ICT and has 
developed multimedia presentations that include animations and video clips. 
Music Twenty computers in the library have music software installed and are used to teach the technology 
component of the Leaving Certificate course. 

Construction 

Each class goes to the computer room about once a week. All students of the subject do some computer-aided 
Studies 

design (CAD) work and produce a working drawing for their examination design brief. The computer room is 
also used for researching project work. 
History 

Two history teachers use the classroom with the interactive whiteboard to teach their students weekly. All four 
history teachers prepare lesson materials and examination papers using word-processing and web sites. The 
teachers maintain computerised records of students’ progress. 

153 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
An analysis of principals’ views found that ICT resources were being used more frequently and 
effectively to assist teaching and learning in the science and social studies I subjects (History, 
Geography, Art, Craft and Design, and Music). The lowest use of resources, according to the 
principals, was in foreign languages. Interviews with principals during case-study school evaluations 
confirmed this finding: subjects reported as being prominent in making effective use of ICT included 
Science and applied science subjects, Guidance, and History. 

The national survey of principals asked them to comment on how the use of ICT in their school was 
benefiting teaching and learning. A sample of the comments offered by principals in different 
school types and sizes is provided in table 6.6. It was found that 51% of the 110 principals surveyed 
were of the view that ICT contributed to improving lesson content, 39% felt that its use in lessons 
contributed to improved ICT skills, while 20% described how ICT contributed to improving teaching 
skills. 

Of the 40% of principals who reported during subject inspections that there was no use of ICT in 
subjects, even though ICT facilities were reported as being available, many cited a number of 
reasons for this. It was reported, for example, that there were inadequate facilities or access 
problems, or both, in some schools, as well as scheduling difficulties, inadequate teacher education 
and support, and a lack of confidence or interest on the part of the teacher. 

Table 6.6: Principals’ views on the impact of ICT on teaching and learning 

School sector, type, size Principals’ views on how ICT benefits teaching and learning 
Vocational, co-educational, 

Improved access to information, teaching aids and learning aids through use of internet and 

large (600+) learning software. Students have become more “computer-literate.” They have become more 
familiar with diversity of uses attributable to the computer. ICT is an important aid in self-
directed learning. ICT is very useful for project work and in the implementation of alternative 
programmes, such as JCSP and LCA. 
Secondary, single-sex, Preparation of class materials. Increasing use of data projectors. Quality of prepared hand-outs 
medium (400–599) and examination papers. Use of internet for research in various subjects. 
Secondary, single-sex, ICT allows for varied teaching methods; students attuned to screen presentation; multi-sensory 
large (600+) approach; use of internet and reference resources for project work. The ability to produce and 
distribute hand-outs facilitates students’ focus on content. ICT cuts out repetitive and time-
consuming blackboard work. It facilitates exchange and sharing with other teachers and 
students. 
Secondary, single-sex, Teachers feel challenged and empowered. Students find the use of ICT in lessons to be special 
large (600+) and exciting. 

Vocational, co-educational, 

ICT facilitates research. It improves presentations of work and acquaints students with 

medium (400–599) 

technology of the work-place. 

Secondary, co-educational, 

ICT makes learning more interesting and interactive for students. It motivates both students 

small (fewer than 400) 

and teachers and increases knowledge of the latest technology and methods of learning. 

154 



ICT and teaching and learning in post-primary schools Chapter 6 
6.4.2 ICT in practice in the classroom 
ICT facilities in classrooms 

It was clear from inspector’s observations that the extent of use of computers is subject-related or 
classroom-related. Details of the location of 307 of the 311 lessons observed are given in table 6.7. 

Table 6.7: Location of lessons observed during subject inspections 

General classroom Computer room Specialist room Other n 
Science 

15% 

0 

85% 

0 

54 

Applied Science 

10% 

4% 

87% 

0 

52 

Social Studies I 

49% 

4% 

45% 

2% 

51 

Foreign languages 

89% 

7% 

5% 

0 

44 

English 

86% 

3% 

11% 

0 

36 

Mathematics 

81% 

10% 

10% 

0 

21 

Business Studies 

88% 

6% 

6% 

0 

16 

Irish 

100% 

0 

0 

0 

14 

Social Studies II 

0 

0 

0 

100% 

8 

Other 

45% 

45% 

9% 

0 

11 

n = 307 

Specialist rooms were used more extensively for science or applied science subjects and, to a lesser 
extent, subjects in the social studies I group (History, Geography, Art, Craft and Design, and Music). 
Foreign-language, English, Business Studies and Mathematics lessons were predominantly 
conducted in a general classroom. All the Irish lessons observed were conducted in a general 
classroom. 

Table 6.8: ICT resources available in the classrooms of lessons observed 

No ICT resources Computer Data projector Other n 
(or computers) 
Science 42% 58% 27% 11% 55 
Applied Science 54% 44% 17% 21% 52 
Social Studies I 76% 18% 8% 13% 38 
Foreign languages 86% 11% 8% 6% 36 
English 85% 15% 0 3% 34 
Mathematics 75% 25% 5% 15% 20 
Business Studies 59% 41% 18% 12% 17 
Irish 100% 0 0 0 13 
Social Studies II 86% 14% 0 0 7 
Other 20% 80% 60% 20% 10 
n = 282 

155 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
Table 6.8 gives details of ICT resources available in the classrooms where lessons were observed. As 
can be seen, excluding the “other” category - which includes Computer Studies - computers and 
data projectors were more likely to be observed during a science lesson (58% of the science lessons 
observed had computers available in the room, while 27% had a data projector). Nevertheless, 
where a computer was present in a Science lesson, the majority of rooms (72%) had only one 
computer. The majority of classrooms in which foreign-language, English and Mathematics lessons 
were conducted, which were predominantly general classrooms, had no ICT facilities present. None 
of the Irish lessons observed had ready access to ICT facilities. 

The findings of the national survey of teachers also showed that computers were most frequently 
used in classrooms by teachers of the science subjects (70%), applied science subjects (64%), and 
Mathematics (61%). A lower than average proportion of teachers of Irish (41%) reported using 
computers in teaching. 

The case-study school evaluations also found little evidence of students’ engagement with ICT in 
general classroom settings. It is clear that there is a greater permeation of computers in specialist 
rooms than in general classrooms. However, as already recommended in chapter 3, efforts need to 
be aimed at equipping general classrooms also. 

ICT use in the planning and preparation of observed lessons 

Inspectors reported evidence of ICT being used in the planning or preparation of 128 (41%) of the 
311 lessons observed. The level of use by subject area is illustrated in fig. 6.4.74 

Fig. 6.4: Use of ICT in the planning and preparation of observed lessons 

Evidence that ICT was used in planning/preparing for this 
lesson 

Social Studies I 
Business Studies 
Irish 
Science 
Applied Science 
Mathematics 
English 
Foreign Languages 
Social Studies II 

57% 
53% 
50% 
48% 
36% 
33% 
30% 
16% 
13% 
20% 40% 60% 80% 100%0% 
Base: All post-primary lesson observations (n = 311) 

74 All social studies II lessons were Physical Education. 

156 



ICT and teaching and learning in post-primary schools Chapter 6 
ICT was used in the planning and preparation undertaken by teachers in 57% of the social studies I 
subject lessons observed (History, Geography, Art, Craft and Design, and Music). A higher than 
average rate of ICT use in planning and preparation was noted in the Business Studies and Irish 
lessons observed. This finding for planning for Irish lessons contrasts sharply with the low level of 
use of ICT in Irish lessons reported earlier. The lowest rate of use of ICT in planning and preparation 
was for social studies II subjects (Religious Education, Physical Education, CSPE, and SPHE) and 
foreign-language lessons. 

Focus of ICT use 

During the subject inspections in schools inspectors interviewed all the teachers of the subject being 
inspected. Specifically, they asked them what use they made, if any, of ICT during teaching and 
learning in their subject (or subjects). The findings are illustrated in fig. 6.5. 

Fig. 6.5: Main uses of ICT in teaching and learning in the subjects inspected, as reported by 
teachers 

Research and investigation skills 
Writing skills 
Presentation skills 
Communication skills 
Problem solving/analytic/evaluative skills 
Team/collaborative skills 

81% 
65% 
64% 
28% 
27% 
21% 
20% 40% 60% 80% 100%0% 
Base: All ICT Review Schedule subject questionnaires (n = 168) 

The interviews revealed that the main use for ICT in all subjects inspected was to help students 
develop their research and investigation skills (81% of teachers interviewed). Teachers also reported 
using ICT frequently to develop students’ writing and presentation skills (65% and 64%, 
respectively). ICT was less likely to be used to develop higher-order skills, such as problem-solving, 
analytical and evaluative skills (27%). It was found that ICT was least likely to be used to develop 
students’ teamwork and collaborative skills (21%). 

In an era when the essential skills of the work force include an ability to handle and process large 
amounts of information and an ability to work collaboratively as part of a team, it is important that 
the school curriculum would provide teachers with opportunities to integrate the development of 
these ICT skills in their teaching. 

157 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
Frequency of ICT use 

Evidence from the subject inspections suggests that the incidence of ICT use in teaching and 
learning is low. Furthermore, of the teachers who integrate ICT in their classroom practice many 
have come to rely on only a small repertoire of teaching methods that use the technology. 

Only 56 (18%) of the 311 lessons observed during subject inspections incorporated the use of ICT. 
Students’ interaction with the technology was observed in only about a quarter (24%) of these. Two 
activities in particular dominated these fifty-six lessons. The first was where the teacher used a 
computer and data projector to give a presentation to a class group. The majority of these 
presentations were text-based and did not fully use the potential of the medium.75 The second was 
where the teacher used a computer to search the internet during a lesson. In most of these 
instances the teachers had a printer that made it possible to print material that could be used as a 
teaching aid. However, in most instances a digital projector would have saved valuable teaching 
time and might have contributed more to engaging students in the lesson. 

The survey of teachers suggested a higher degree of computer use in teaching and learning than 
that observed by inspectors—55% of teachers reported using computers in their teaching at some 
time (see fig. 6.6). However, teachers’ use of ICT in teaching and learning on either measure was 
significantly less than their use of ICT in planning and preparing lessons (78% of teachers). 

Fig. 6.6: Frequency of use of computers in teaching 

How frequently do you use computers in your teaching? 

60% 

40% 

20% 

0% 

At least once a week24% 
9% 
22%
45%
About 2/3 times a month Less than twice a month Never 

Base: All post-primary teachers (800) 

Organisation of ICT use 

It is clear that the most common teaching mode in which ICT was used in those lessons observed by 
inspectors was where the teacher took charge of the technology. When interaction with students 
did occur it usually involved the individual use of the computer, in rotation, in general classroom 

75 For example, there was little use of such resources as video clips, animations, sound or internet simulations in any of the presentations 
observed. 

158 



ICT and teaching and learning in post-primary schools Chapter 6 
settings; but some examples of small-group work on the computer were also observed in specialist 
room settings. It was possible for group work to take place in these rooms because they usually had 
more than one computer. However, the use of computer rooms, where individual students had 
access to a computer, was rare in most subject inspections. Of the 311 lessons observed, only 11 
were held in computer rooms. Fig. 6.7 gives details of how frequently teachers reported using ICT 
with their students in a range of settings. 

Fig. 6.7: Settings in which ICT is used in classrooms 

How frequently do you use ICT with your 
classes in each of the following contexts? 

Whole-class teaching in designated computer room 

Group activity in designated computer room 
Whole-class teaching in general classroom or 
specialist room 
Individual students working on computers in general 
classroom, or specialist room, on a rotational basis 
Field work/out-of-school activities 

Group activity in general classroom or specialist room 

Individual students working in designated computer room/ 
library on a rotational basis 

50%40%30%20%10%0% 
4%18% 17% 
6%9% 18% 
5%12% 13% 
6%8% 13% 
4%3% 18% 
6%6% 12% 
4%7% 11% 
At least once a week 

About 2/3 times a month 

Less than twice a month 

Base: All post-primary teachers (800) 

The survey found that the most popular teaching mode in which ICT was used was whole-class 
teaching in a dedicated computer room (implemented by 39% of all teachers). In such instances all 
students would generally have individual access to a computer. The survey revealed that this mode 
was employed most frequently by teachers of Business Studies, Mathematics, and English. The next 
most frequent teaching mode (32%) involved group activity in a dedicated computer room; this was 
followed by whole-class teaching in a general or specialist classroom (30%).76 It is noteworthy that 
the SCR in a school had a negligible effect on the use of ICT in any of these settings. It can be 
concluded, therefore, that teachers’ willingness to use ICT is at least as important as the availability 
of ICT equipment. 

76 The survey found that approximately 17 % of the 800 teachers who responded taught ICT as a discrete subject. This may have had an 
influence on the numbers of teachers who reported teaching in a dedicated computer room. 

159 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
Teaching activities incorporating ICT 

As mentioned earlier, the range of activities employed by teachers during subject inspections that 
incorporated ICT was limited. (The two most popular activities observed were where the teacher 
used ICT equipment to give a presentation or to look up information on the internet.) While a 
limited number of other activities were employed during observed lessons, a greater range was 
either evidenced or reported by teachers during the evaluations undertaken in the case-study 
schools. These activities included the following (presented in no particular order): 

• word-processing (by teachers and students) 

• internet searches by students, for example finding foreign-language newspapers as part of a 

language lesson, or visualising earthquakes on line as part of a geography lesson. The internet 

was seen as a particularly useful resource in some schools for “newcomer” students, who used it 

for translation and communication purposes 

• the use of subject-specific software by students individually, in pairs, or in small groups, for 
example CAD in the applied science subjects and Qualifax in Guidance 

• creating video stories from text 

• using digital cameras 

• using graphic calculators, especially in Mathematics 

• data-logging and using digital microscopes in science lessons 

• using DVD resources, for example for case studies 

• recording students’ work, including photographic material, on DVD 

• using specific ICT equipment related to particular subjects, for example computer numerically 
controlled (CNC) lathe and router in Engineering and Construction Studies. 

The survey of teachers explored two of these ICT-related activities in greater detail, namely use of 
the internet and use of applications. 

Use of the internet 

The survey of teachers asked them about the use they made of the internet to facilitate teaching 
and learning. Only 34% of respondents, as shown in table 6.9, stated that they used the internet in 
their classroom practice. Approximately 66% of teachers, therefore, do not use the internet in their 
classroom practice. The reasons for not using it included the fact that there were no computer 
facilities or internet access in classrooms (see table 6.8), and that the teachers lacked the necessary 
knowledge of how to use it, or the time to devote to it. 

160 



ICT and teaching and learning in post-primary schools Chapter 6 ICT and teaching and learning in post-primary schools Chapter 6 
Table 6.9: Use of the internet and software in teaching and learning 

Proportion of respondents Age Gender SCR 
answering “yes” to— Under 35 35–45 Over 45 Male Female Low High Total 
using the internet in their 

41% 

30% 

29% 

37% 

33% 

38% 

31% 

34% 
classroom practice 
using software to 
facilitate teaching and 

56% 

46% 

48% 

51% 

50% 

50% 

51% 

50% 
learning 
n 

272 

210 

290 

260 

468 

323 

321 

800 

With regard to both use of computers and use of the internet, it seems that teachers are more 
amenable to using these resources in lesson planning and preparation than in the classroom 
environment. There is little doubt that this is directly related to the current limited availability of ICT 
resources in classrooms. 

Use of software 

Computer applications were used to facilitate teaching and learning, as shown in table 6.9, by 50% 
of the teachers who responded to the survey. The most popular type of application used was word-
processing (71%); this was followed by presentation software (59%), reference software (47%), 
and content-rich software (36%). These teachers reported that the most common method they 
used for selecting applications was by asking other teachers for their advice or by consulting 
educational web sites. 

It is worth noting that teachers’ age had a bearing on the proportion using both internet and 
software resources in lessons: teachers under thirty-five (as can be seen from table 6.9) were more 
likely to use these resources. 

161 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
ICT use in subjects 

The ICT review schedules, the survey of teachers and the case-study school evaluations all reported 
that ICT was used in different subject areas to varying degrees. It is clear, however, that a number of 
subject areas excel in this respect. Significant integration of ICT was found to occur in the teaching 
of Science and applied science subjects, as well as in the social studies I group of subjects (History, 
Geography, Art, Craft and Design, and Music). The use of data-logging was popular in the science 
subjects, along with computer-aided design (CAD) software in the technology subjects. One case-
study school report in particular mentioned that the students 

demonstrated their use of the parametric CAD software to develop and rotate drawings. These students 
were quite enthusiastic about the support the use of this program brought to their learning in the 
subject, mentioning that the ability to view a three-dimensional drawing and to rotate it through different 
angles made it much easier to visualise the actual artefact. Like other applications of ICT being used in 
the school, this is a good example of how ICT can be used to enhance the students’ learning experience. 

A number of subjects were also identified as regular users of ICT, including Guidance and foreign 
languages. The use of ICT for pen-pal projects and e-twinning to support the study of modern 
languages was regularly mentioned by inspectors in their case-study school evaluation reports. The 
use of specialised programs for careers research in whole-class settings, particularly in the LCA and 
LCVP, was also emphasised in numerous case-study evaluation reports. In other instances ICT was 
used individually to assist with career guidance for students. 

Finally, subjects were identified in which there was minimal use of ICT, most notably in Irish. This 
was not helped by the fact that all the Irish lessons observed during subject inspections took place in 
general classrooms that had no ICT facilities present. 

Fig. 6.8: Use of the internet and applications, by subject area 

100% 
80% 
60% 
40% 
20% 
0% 
50% 
37% 
44% 
28% 
47% 
32% 
44% 
37% 
71% 
34% 
60% 
45% 
53% 
33% 
43% 
34% 
26% 
23% 
Social Social English Foreign Science Applied Mathematics Business Irish 
Studies I Studies II Languages Science Studies 


Do you use the Internet in your classroom practice? 
Do you use software to support teaching and learning? 

Base: All post-primary teachers (800) 

162 



ICT and teaching and learning in post-primary schools Chapter 6 
Fig 6.8 shows that a high proportion of teachers of science subjects (71%) and applied science 
subjects (60%), as well as Mathematics (53%), reported using software to facilitate teaching and 
learning. The internet was used mostly by teachers of applied science subjects (45%). A relatively 
low proportion of teachers of Irish reported using the internet (23%) and applications (26%). 

It was noteworthy from case-study school reports that the provision of recent continuing 
professional development by support service teams had an effect on the level of integration of ICT 
in teaching and learning for the subjects concerned. Teachers interviewed during the case-study 
school evaluations mentioned that the support services had introduced them to the idea of 
engaging with ICT as part of their approach to teaching. This support was provided, in all instances, 
in the context of syllabus revision. This in turn would point to the fact that the NCCA policy of “ICT-
proofing” syllabuses and guidelines of subjects as they are being reviewed or revised is paying 
dividends. This ICT-proofing process has the effect of establishing the role of ICT as a teaching and 
learning tool, and as an integral part of the curriculum and assessment procedures. 

Building on the recommendation already made in chapter 3 on providing all teaching spaces in 
schools with ICT facilities, schools should also become active in promoting the integration of ICT in 
the subjects they offer on their curriculum. Regular audits of ICT facilities in schools should be 
undertaken, to include information on whether the available facilities are being used in subjects 
and, if so, in what ways. Strategies should be developed in schools, supported by the appropriate 
second-level support services, to help teachers to integrate ICT in their teaching practices. For 
example, schools might revise the functions of their ICT co-ordinators with a view to giving them a 
more educational or pedagogical role regarding ICT. Schools could also organise appropriate 
professional development opportunities for teachers, peer mentoring arrangements, and the 
development of targets for the acquisition of facilities. 

6.4.3 Quality of provision 
Inspectors were asked to state the quality of use of ICT in teaching and learning during those 
lessons observed as part of the subject inspections. Fig. 6.9 shows that 54% of inspectors’ reports 
on lesson observations revealed limited or inappropriate use, or no use, of ICT in teaching and 
learning. This is supported by the observation that an ICT-related activity took place during only 
18% of observed lessons (predominantly undertaken by the teacher) and that only 24% of post-
primary teachers used computers in their teaching at least once a week.77 In 35% of instances the 
inspectors reported that there was scope for development, while in 11% of instances they reported 
a competent or optimal level of performance. 

77 See fig. 6.6. 

163 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
0% 
20% 
40% 
60% 
54% 
35% 
9% 
2% 
Fig. 6.9: Inspectors’ rating of the quality of use of ICT in teaching and learning observed 

No, very little, Scope for Competent practice Optimal level of 
or inappropriate use of ICT development performance 

Base: All review schedules from Post-Primary Inspectors (n = 168) 

One ICT review schedule arising from an inspection of English, which showed that ICT was used 
either sparingly or inappropriately in the lessons observed, mentioned that 

none of the classrooms in which English teachers were based had been wired for broadband at the time 
of the inspection. The English teachers reported that the school’s plan for using the networking grant was 
to create another computer room rather than to wire all general classrooms for internet access. One 
teacher, who regularly creates her own resources on her home laptop, stated that she would like to be 
able to show students particular websites to support her teaching, but that [the] management was more 
interested in centralising ICT resources. 

A history lesson in which it was reported that there was scope for development of the use of ICT in 
the subject stated: 

Teachers could make greater use of word-processing to prepare worksheets and involve students in 
researching suitable aspects of lessons at appropriate times from the websites. Clips of DVDs would help 
to give a visual dimension to the delivery of some lessons. 

Only 2% of the inspectors’ reports on lesson observations stated that optimal use of ICT in teaching 
and learning was observed. In a Latin lesson an inspector reported seeing 

very good practice in this school, particularly in the case of the two main teachers of Latin. The facilities 
are very good and in the case of one of the lessons observed, the organisational skills were excellent since 
half of the class was conducted in the classroom and the second half in the computer room. This was 
managed very efficiently and no time was wasted. It is also understood that the Classical Studies teachers 
use ICT too. Evidence was presented which indicated this to be the case. 

The social studies I, science and applied science groups of subjects achieved the highest ratings from 
inspectors for the quality of use of ICT in teaching and learning. An analysis of inspectors’ review 
schedules that showed the use of ICT to be either “competent” or “optimal” revealed that: 

164 



ICT and teaching and learning in post-primary schools Chapter 6 
• ICT was available in the classrooms, and teachers and students therefore had ready access to 
appropriate ICT hardware and software 

• ICT-related activities were regular features of lessons, and students regularly engaged with the 
ICT during such lessons 

• teachers were committed and enthusiastic about using ICT as part of their teaching strategies 

• ICT permeated the subject area in the school 

• ICT was being used to develop students’ skills in a range of areas, for example writing, research 
and presentation skills. 

The impact of ICT on teaching and learning 

Inspectors were of the view that, when used effectively, ICT contributed to teaching and learning in 
varying ways. In the 56 (out of 311) lessons observed during subject inspections that incorporated 
an ICT-related activity, practically all inspectors reported that the activity contributed in some way to 
effective teaching and learning. The benefits that ICT can have for teaching and learning, as viewed 
by inspectors, included: 

• using ICT means that information can be obtained almost instantly. The worldwide web, for 
example, contains a vast amount of easily accessible information. Such information can provide 
learners with different viewpoints and a wider understanding of issues 

• ICT helps teachers to tailor teaching materials to suit the needs and ability levels of their students 

• ICT acts as an incentive for students to learn. The technology can be effective in engaging them 
in their schoolwork 

• ICT helps make learning more interesting. It increases levels of interest, for example through the 
use of colour, animation, and sound. It also facilitates multi-sensory learning through, for 
example, multimedia presentations, animation, and video 

• ICT helps students to work at their own pace and level. Some programs, for example, have 
“intelligent” tracking systems that adjust the pace of learning. ICT contributes to the 
development of a personalised or step-by-step learning scheme. It provides opportunities for 
students to learn in different ways 

• some programs affirm students’ efforts, and this can encourage them in their learning. This 
facility also provides them with timely feedback on their work and provides them with an 
understanding of their progression 

• ICT facilitates student-centred learning and can encourage students to take responsibility for their 
own learning. Some software individually identifies students’ problem areas for extra 
reinforcement. ICT encourages self-directed learning 

165 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
• ICT helps develop numerous skills, including critical thinking, literacy, numeracy, typing, 
presentation, creativity, and research skills. It also allows a higher level of analysis to take place 
than would otherwise be possible 

• for some students the action of typing material can be an aid to understanding it 

• ICT helps teachers and students to improve how they present information. It facilitates the 
creative and professional presentation of material and encourages students to take pride in their 
work 

• ICT captures students’ attention for significant time spans. The visual impact facilitated by ICT, for 
example, helps to hold their attention and helps them to retain information. The visual nature of 
working with ICT allows links to be made through visual imagery 

• ICT helps increase the amount of work that can be taught in a lesson. Some programs are 
tailored to the curriculum 

• effective use of ICT puts the teacher in a facilitative rather than an instructional role 

• the use of ICT increases students’ understanding of concepts and helps consolidate learning. In 
general, it makes learning more memorable and brings the subject matter to life 

• using ICT can help raise students’ self-esteem 

• ICT helps to prepare students for life after school. Proficiency in ICT skills, for example, can 
improve job prospects 

• effective use of ICT, especially in individual, pair and group work with computers, can lead to 
improved classroom discipline and improved management of learning. 

Inspectors also emphasised some of the negative effects that ICT can have if it is not employed 
effectively. These included the following: 

• students can become frustrated with ICT hardware and software in schools that have regular 
technical problems. This can discourage them from wanting to use school computers 

• the security of personal work is important. Teachers and students dislike their work being 
interfered with, and the provision of secure storage space for work done is therefore crucial 

• students can become irritated when there is no one-to-one access to computers in their lessons 
(that is, when they don’t “get their turn”). In a lesson that involves interaction with the computer 
it is important that teachers endeavour to allow all students an opportunity to use the computer. 

In summary, it is clear that ICT has the potential to positively influence teaching and learning. While 
there can be certain drawbacks in using the technology, these are outweighed by the potential it 
offers. It would seem incumbent on teachers to maximise the potential offered by ICT whenever and 
wherever possible. 

166 



ICT and teaching and learning in post-primary schools Chapter 6 
6.5 ICT and special educational needs 
The NCTE and NCCA provide a wide range of information for schools on the use of ICT in the area 
of special educational needs.78 

The evaluation attempted to gain an insight into the extent and quality of use of ICT in this area. An 
analysis of the survey of teachers found that 37% reported teaching students with special 
educational needs. Most reported using specific applications to aid the teaching process, while some 
reported using specialised technology devices. While inspectors’ subject inspections and the case-
study school visits allowed this finding to be explored further, it was the latter that proved more 
insightful. 

It was clear from lesson observations associated with subject inspections that the use of ICT to help 
students with SEN was not prominent in the mainstream classroom. Inspectors reported being 
aware of students with special needs being present in 23% of the 311 lessons they observed during 
subject inspections. There was very little evidence, however, of ICT being used to support these 
students’ learning. Indeed the majority of inspectors’ comments stated that ICT was not used. When 
it was used it usually took the form of students working individually with specialised software on 
laptop computers. One review schedule pertaining to a science lesson, for example, stated that 
“one student with a sight problem used a laptop on which the diagrams were enlarged.” 

Case-study school reports provided evidence of the contribution of ICT to teaching and learning for 
students with special educational needs. The use of ICT in special education in all the case-study 
schools was organised to take place in small but discrete teaching areas with computer facilities or 
by withdrawing students from mainstream lessons to a classroom with such facilities. In many 
instances schools had developed a separate resource area for students with SEN that contained a 
number of laptop or desktop computers. In other schools they used laptops provided by the school 
(but stored centrally) for either individual support or within small groups. In most schools the 
extension of the network had included these small teaching areas. 

The emphasis of students’ engagement with ICT was mainly on supporting literacy. Software for 
reading, comprehension and spelling was most in evidence; there was less evidence of ICT support 
for numeracy. Teachers interviewed spoke of the positive impact ICT had on these students, as well 
as the impact of animation, music, and colour. They described how students felt comfortable with 
the technology and the positive and affirming effects on them of the self-assessment and 
achievement feedback aspects of software. 

78 The NCTE’s Planning and Advice for Schools contains an advice sheet (number 28) for teachers getting involved for the first time in 

the purchase of ICT for special needs. Other sources of advice from the NCTE include the booklet Information and Advice: Special 

Educational Needs and Information and Communications Technology and the Special Needs Technology section of Scoilnet. The 

recently published NCCA document Guidelines for Teachers of Students with General Learning Disabilities (2007) contains advice 

on the ways in which ICT can facilitate and increase access to learning and communication for pupils with general learning 

disabilities. 

167 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
6.6 Assessment 
The evaluation found no evidence of ICT being used to assess students’ academic progress at post-
primary level. Furthermore, it found limited assessment being undertaken of students’ ICT skills. 
Where this was done it was mainly confined to dedicated ICT lessons in Transition Year. Two of the 
case-study schools visited provided the ECDL course as part of their Transition Year programme; on 
completion of Transition Year students were accredited with the ECDL modules successfully 
completed. In another school the City and Guilds Level 2 keyboarding and word-processing 
examinations were used to assess and accredit achievement in ICT. The assessment of ICT skills was 
integrated in the formal assessment of tasks and assignments in the LCA, the ICT Vocational 
Specialism in LCA, and the portfolio assessment for LCVP. 

Teachers used ICT mostly for administrative purposes in assessment. During the course of subject 
inspections, for example, 55% of teachers interviewed reported using ICT to simplify or streamline 
their assessment practices. Examples of the ways in which ICT was used in subjects included: 

• using the internet to research topics or questions for inclusion in examination papers 

• designing and preparing examination papers or worksheets 

• entering the results of examinations in a student database system 

• recording and storing students’ results 

• creating student profiles 

• generating student reports 

• using the computer for e-tests (for example on Scoilnet). 

It is evident that the potential of ICT for use in assessment in many subjects is not being harnessed. 
This could include, for example, the use of ICT to assess, track and analyse students’ progress by the 
use of appropriate software. Schools should consider exploiting the benefits of ICT in their 
assessment practices to go beyond purely administrative functions. The NCCA, in collaboration with 
the NCTE and SEC, should advise schools on how this can be achieved in different curricular areas. 
The outcome of the e-portfolio project at present being organised by the three organisations will 
contribute to the development of advice and guidelines. 

6.7 Developing ICT in the classroom 
6.7.1 Factors that constrain the development of ICT in the 
classroom 
Inspectors commented in case-study school evaluation reports on the factors that constrained the 
development of ICT in schools. One of the most common factors was the reluctance of some 

168 



ICT and teaching and learning in post-primary schools Chapter 6 
teachers to engage with the technology. This reluctance had a number of sources. One was the fact 
that some teachers seemed reluctant to change their own classroom practice and techniques that 
they had developed successfully over many years. It was also reported that some teachers were 
reluctant to facilitate any change to their role in the classroom, or to their relationship with their 
students. Teachers were also reported to be reluctant to engage with the technology because of 
their lack of technical knowledge, a general lack of enthusiasm, or unfamiliarity with, or fear of, the 
technology. It was generally noted by inspectors, however, that this reluctance was for the most part 
a skills-dependent issue. Like many others, one report mentioned that “teachers interviewed 
expressed a desire for training in both general and subject-specific skills.” Teachers who were 
considered to have good ICT skills tended to act as a positive influence on their colleagues, in 
encouraging others to engage with the technology. 

Inspectors felt that the lack of ready access to ICT facilities in teaching areas in schools constrained 
the integration of ICT in the teaching and learning process. Many were also of the view that the 
time required to set up ICT equipment, or to move students to a computer room, was a significant 
erosion of teaching time and therefore acted as a constraint to integration. Many also referred to 
technical issues that can arise with equipment and to a lack of available technical support. 

Inspectors also identified the following factors (presented in no particular order) as contributing to 
constraining the development of ICT in classrooms: 

• limited finance, the result being insufficient or out-of-date hardware and software 

• curricular pressure of subjects 

• packed timetables, for example the issue of restricted access to the computer room and the 

inconvenience experienced by some teachers in having to take students from their base 

classroom to a computer room. The timetable was sometimes viewed restricting for conducting 

cross-curricular collaborative and project work 

• lack of time on the part of the ICT co-ordinator to research or install ICT infrastructure, and lack 
of time available to teachers to research and engage with the technology 

• lack of training available to and availed of by teachers 

• the amount of work involved in adapting or generating relevant subject-specific materials 

• a lack of awareness in the wider school community of the value of ICT as a learning tool 

• space restrictions in classrooms 

• the absence of planning 

• the existence of an examination-driven curriculum, coupled with the fact that school assessment 
procedures, for the most part, do not reflect an emphasis on using ICT 

169 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
• the fact that a teacher can be regarded as an excellent teacher without the use of ICT, so there is 
a disincentive to risk change. 

6.7.2 Factors that facilitate the development of ICT in the 
classroom 
Inspectors identified the following factors (presented in no particular order) as facilitating the 
development of ICT in classrooms: 

• the availability of grants and funding (provided by various sources, for example DES, parents, 
board of management) 

• the positive attitude, encouragement and vision of the school management 

• teachers’ enthusiasm and interest, teamwork and collegiality, and a positive and open attitude 
among the teaching staff 

• the needs of the curriculum, Transition Year, LCVP and LCA in the senior cycle, which encourage 
the use of ICT in the classroom 

170 



ICT and teaching and learning in post-primary schools Chapter 6 
• professional development training for teachers (whether provided by the NCTE or ICT advisory 
service as part of in-service support for revised syllabuses, organised at the school level or 
acquired as part of academic courses) 

• the availability of technical support that contributes to making the technology more reliable 

• professional dialogue with other teachers who are using the technology (for example facilitating 
departmental meetings, allowing discussion and development to take place at the departmental 
level) 

• access to appropriate ICT hardware, software, and the internet (for example availability of a 
computer room, availability of laptop computers and mobile data projectors for use in general 
classrooms, internet access and broadband) 

• whole-school evaluations, subject inspections, and visits from other professionals 

• the professionalism and expertise of the ICT co-ordinator 

• study visits to other schools that are advanced in using ICT 

• the availability of computers in the staff room 

• an awareness among staff members of what ICT facilities are available to them in their school 

• easy access to resources on the internet, such as the NCTE and Scoilnet 

• participation in ICT for school initiatives, for example the NCTE Laptops Initiative 

• pressure from students and peers 

• the fact that ICT holds students’ attention and so contributes to better discipline. 

Foremost among the facilitating factors was the enthusiasm and motivation of staff members to 
engage with ICT. This engagement related both to the development of their own skills and to their 
motivation to integrate ICT in teaching and learning. It was clear from discussions with both 
teachers and principals in case-study schools that they shared the desire to increase the integration 
of ICT in classroom teaching. The level of DES, NCTE and other funding was also viewed as an 
important facilitating factor. Most schools, however, made it clear that they had raised extra funds 
above and beyond those provided by the DES and NCTE to develop their ICT infrastructure. (See 
also chapter 3.) 

When asked to express their level of agreement with the statement that these were facilitating 
factors, teachers expressed the highest level of agreement with having a computer in the classroom. 
All respondents either “agreed strongly” (almost 70%) or “agreed” with the statement that having 
a computer in the classroom facilitated the development of ICT. 

171 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
6.8 Findings and recommendations 
6.8.1 Main findings 
Teachers’ ICT skills 

• Significant numbers of teachers lack intermediate (or better) ICT skills in a wide range of areas. 
Of those who are proficient in ICT skills, many do not use them in their teaching practice. It can 
be assumed that other factors, such as access to computers and teachers’ motivation, may 
influence the transfer of teachers’ competence in individual applications to classroom practice. 
Recently qualified teachers had a higher perception of their ICT skills than more experienced 
teachers. 

Dedicated ICT lessons 

• Dedicated ICT lessons are more prevalent among first-year class groups, and are provided less 
frequently as students progress towards the Junior Certificate. The majority of schools 
concentrate on providing dedicated ICT lessons in their Transition Year, LCVP, or LCA. The most 
popular topics taught in these lessons are word-processing, the internet, spreadsheets, and 
presentations. 

• The computer studies subject in the junior cycle was provided by only 13% of the schools 
surveyed, while at Leaving Certificate level it was provided by 23%. The majority of schools 
surveyed provided ECDL courses for their students. 

Use of ICT in teaching and learning 

• The principals of case-study schools reported that not all ICT resources provided to subject 
teachers were being used in teaching and learning. The factors inhibiting their use included 
problems with access and scheduling, inadequate teacher training and support, lack of 
confidence or interest on the part of the teacher, and inadequate facilities. 

• Interviews with teachers in case-study schools found that the main use for ICT in all subjects was 
the development of students’ research, investigation, writing and presentation skills. ICT was 
least likely to be used to develop teamwork and collaborative skills. 

• Schools give priority to furnishing specialist classrooms with ICT facilities over general classrooms. 

• Of the 311 lessons observed by inspectors during subject inspections, 56 (18%) involved an ICT-
related activity. Students’ interaction with the technology was observed in only about a quarter of 
these. The most common ICT-related activity observed was the use of a computer and data 
projector to make a presentation to a class group. 

172 



ICT and teaching and learning in post-primary schools Chapter 6 
• Only 11% of inspectors’ reports on 311 lesson observations during subject inspections reported 
that there was competent practice, or that ICT was effectively integrated in the teaching and 
learning process. 

• The survey of teachers found that the most popular setting in which ICT was used was whole-
class teaching in a dedicated computer room. 

• In relation to the use of ICT in teaching, the survey of teachers showed that 55% used 
computers, 50% used applications, and 34% used the internet. 

• The Transition Year, LCVP and LCA programmes greatly encourage the integration of ICT in 
teaching and learning. 

• High levels of integration of ICT were found in the science and applied science subjects, 
Mathematics and the subjects in the social studies I group. A number of subjects were identified 
as being regular users of ICT, such as Guidance and foreign languages. Subjects were also 
identified that rarely made use of ICT, the most notable being Irish. 

• The provision of continuing professional development by support services, particularly in syllabus 
revision, has a positive effect on the level of integration of ICT in teaching and learning for the 
subjects concerned. The “ICT-proofing” policy being implemented by the NCCA for subjects that 
are being reviewed or revised is a positive contribution to integrating ICT in teaching and 
learning. 

• Principals, teachers and students stated that ICT has the potential to improve students’ 
motivation and engagement and to make learning more exciting. In particular, principals and 
teachers stated that it contributes to improved teaching materials and methods and to improved 
learning outcomes. 

• While nearly two-thirds of students reported using a computer to help them with their 
homework, only 19% of these reported that they did this at least once a week. 

ICT in special education and assessment 

• ICT is widely used to support schools’ provision of special education. The focus of students’ 
engagement with ICT in special-education settings is mainly on supporting literacy. 

• No clear evidence was found of ICT being used in the assessment of students’ academic 
progress. Furthermore, the evaluation found limited assessment being undertaken of the 
development of students’ ICT skills. 

173 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
Students’ ICT skills and ICT work 

• Students use computers most frequently to find information using the internet. They also use 
computers regularly for word-processing, games, and e-mail. The majority of students are able to 
perform many basic operations by themselves, for example saving, printing, deleting, opening 
and editing documents. However, they require assistance in performing more complicated tasks, 
such as moving files or creating multimedia presentations. 

• Students become discouraged from using computers if they continually have technical problems. 
They also become discouraged if they don’t “get their turn” on the computer and if their 
personal work is interfered with. 

• The quality of students’ ICT work observed in schools was described in very positive terms by 
inspectors. Students were always capable of discussing their work in a competent and confident 
manner. 

6.8.2 Recommendations 
Recommendations for policy-makers and policy advisors 

• Teachers need to be supported in meeting the challenge of effectively integrating ICT in their 
classroom practices so that Irish students are placed at the forefront of advances in teaching 
practices and learning techniques. 

• Consideration should be given to ensuring that teachers are provided with opportunities to 
develop skills that are directly applicable to the use of ICT in the classroom. This should be 
addressed in a strategic way through a combination of pre-service, induction and in-service 
training. 

• Consideration needs to be given to either revising or removing the junior cycle and Leaving 
Certificate Computer Studies syllabuses from Rules and Programme for Secondary Schools. Such 
a move would be complemented by the “Framework for ICT in Curriculum and Assessment” at 
present being developed by the NCCA. Notwithstanding these developments, schools would still 
need to be advised about what constitutes an appropriate education in ICT in the senior cycle. 
The NCCA, in collaboration with the NCTE, is best placed to advise schools on this issue. It is 
important, as Irish society moves increasingly into a digital-information environment, that the 
curriculum facilitates the development in students of relevant skills in information-competence. 

• The NCCA, in collaboration with the NCTE and SEC, should advise schools on how ICT can be 
used effectively in assessment procedures and practices. The outcome of the e-portfolio project at 
present being organised by the three organisations will contribute to the development of advice 
and guidelines. 

174 



ICT and teaching and learning in post-primary schools Chapter 6 ICT and teaching and learning in post-primary schools Chapter 6 
• Teacher education departments in third-level colleges should consider giving priority to the study 
of ICT in education for students following a postgraduate diploma in education course. Indeed 
such studies should be given priority in any teaching qualification provided by teacher educators. 

Recommendations for schools 

• Schools should endeavour to balance the ICT experience they plan to provide for their students 
within a particular programme throughout the life span of that programme (for example the 
junior cycle or senior cycle). At present such exposure seems to be concentrated in the first year 
of the junior cycle and, in the case of most students, in the Transition Year of their senior cycle. 

• In providing a programme of discrete ICT lessons, schools should first attempt to ascertain 
students’ existing ICT skill levels and thereafter develop or implement a syllabus that would 
expand their knowledge and their repertoire of skills. 

175 



ICT in Schools • Part 3 ICT and teaching and learning in schools 
Integrating ICT in teaching and learning 

• Schools should be active in promoting the integration of ICT in the subjects they offer. 

• There should be continuous efforts within schools to improve the level of teachers’ access to ICT 
equipment. 

• Management should undertake regular audits of ICT facilities in all subjects, to include 
information on whether available resources are being used and how they are being used. 

• Teachers with good ICT skills should act as mentors to colleagues whose ICT skills are not as well 
developed. Good practice within schools should be disseminated among members of the staff at 
every opportunity. 

• Teachers should regularly review their use of ICT with a view to expanding their repertoire of 
teaching strategies, including opportunities for interaction by students with the technology. This 
should include exploring the use of as wide a range of resources and applications as possible, 
including Scoilnet, educational software, peripherals, e-mail, presentation software, and the 
internet. 

• Teachers should exploit the potential of ICT to develop a range of students’ skills, including 
research and investigation, writing and presentation, communication, teamwork and 
collaborative skills, and the higher-order skills of analysis, evaluation, and problem-solving. 

ICT in special education and assessment 

• When using ICT as a teaching aid for students with special educational needs, schools should 
endeavour to ensure that it is being used to support the widest possible range of students’ 
needs. It should be used, for example, to support the development of students’ numeracy skills, 
as well as their literacy skills. 

• Schools should exploit the benefits of ICT in their assessment procedures and practices beyond 
purely administrative functions. This could include using ICT to assess, track and analyse students’ 
progress through the use of appropriate software. Consideration could be given to assessing 
students’ ICT skill levels also. 

176 



Main findings and recommendations 
Chapter 7 
177Part 4 
Summary of 
findings and 
recommendations 
Main findings and recommendations 
Chapter 7 
177Part 4 
Summary of 
findings and 
recommendations 

ICT in Schools • Part 4 Summary of findings and recommendations ICT in Schools • Part 4 Summary of findings and recommendations 
7.1 Introduction 
This chapter summarises the main findings and recommendations of this report. The findings show 
that, while strides are being made in certain areas of schools’ ICT infrastructure, ICT planning and 
the integration of ICT in classroom practices, there is still significant scope for development, 
integration and expansion of the use of the technology in practically all facets of school life. 

The recommendations are divided into two categories. The first is directed at policy-makers and 
policy advisors; these include such bodies as the Department of Education and Science, the National 
Council for Curriculum and Assessment, and the National Centre for Technology in Education, as 
well as other relevant support services. The recommendations are aimed at making significant 
improvements in the ICT capacity of schools as well as improving standards of teaching and 
learning. The adoption of these recommendations would also facilitate schools in their endeavour to 
implement those recommendations specifically aimed at schools. 

The second category of recommendations is directed at schools, both primary and post-primary. 
These recommendations seek to encourage greater and more effective use of ICT in the teaching 
and learning process. The recommendations suggest how schools could make better use of the ICT 
infrastructure already available to them and how this ICT infrastructure could be improved. They also 
consider how the quality of schools’ ICT planning and the contents of their ICT plans could be 
improved as well as ways in which the plans could be implemented more effectively. 

School management authorities, boards of management, principals, schools’ ICT co-ordinators and 
subject teachers can all play a role in the implementation of these recommendations. Schools could 

178 



Main findings and recommendations Chapter 7 
also seek to involve the wider school community, such as parents and local businesses, where 
possible. They should adopt a strategic approach to implementing the recommendations. This could 
involve, for example, schools establishing their level of development with regard to ICT use, perhaps 
by making use of the ICT planning matrix provided by the NCTE. An ICT plan should then be 
developed that would emphasise those aspects that warrant priority for immediate action. In 
implementing the recommendations schools should seek advice and support from relevant support 
services. 

7.2 Main findings 
7.2.1 Infrastructure 
Funding for ICT 

The evaluation showed that the average student-to-computer ratio (SCR) ranged between 8:1 and 

12:1 in primary schools and between 5.2:1 and 8.4:1 in the post-primary schools. These ratios were 
in line with the findings of the surveys conducted by NCTE which show that the average SCR is 
9.1:1 for primary schools and 7:1 in post-primary schools. Data from the OECD shows that in 
comparison, Ireland lags behind other countries in the provision of computers to schools. Countries 
that have taken the lead in this area are aiming for or achieving a SCR of 5:1 or less. (OECD, 2003). 
Fig. 7.1 International student-computer ratios from PISA 2003 

50 
45 
40 
35 
30 
25 
20 
15 
10 
5 
0 
Number of students per computer 
United StatesAustraliaKoreaHungaryNew ZealandAustriaCanadaJapanDenmarkLuxembourgIcelandNorwaySwitzerlandFinlandSwedenBelgiumNetherlandsItalyCzech Republic

Ireland

MexicoGreeceSpainGermanyPortugalSlovakiaPolandTurkey

Russian FederationBrazil 

Country 

Source: OCED PISA 2003 Database, Table D5.1 available in Are Students Ready for a Technology-Rich World: What PISA Tells Us. 
(OCED, 2006a). 

179 



ICT in Schools • Part 4 Summary of findings and recommendations 
The evaluation found that schools, in the main, made effective use of the grants provided by the 
Department of Education and Science to develop their ICT systems. It was also found that schools 
generally spent considerably more on ICT than the sums made available through such grants. This 
could have the unintended outcome of exacerbating the digital divide in society, as some schools 
may not be in a position to raise private funding. 

Technical support 

One of the major burdens on schools’ budgets with regard to ICT was found to be their spending 
on technical support and maintenance and dealing with computer obsolescence. The lack of 
technical support and maintenance is a major impediment to the development of ICT in schools. 

Location of computers in schools 

The evaluation showed that at primary level the computer room is generally a feature of larger 
schools. However, in response to their national survey, teachers stated that access to computers was 
superior when they were located in classrooms. 

While practically all post-primary schools were found to have a dedicated computer room, many 
were found to experience difficulties with regard to its timetabling. It was clear, for example, that 
certain cohorts of students were given priority when schools timetabled access to the computer 
room. Typically, students in Transition Year and those following the LCA and LCVP programmes 
experienced better access to the computer room. The evaluation also showed that in post-primary 
schools a greater permeation of computers occurred in specialist rooms, such as science and applied 
science subject rooms, than in general classrooms. 

Peripherals 

Printers were found to be the most widely used ICT peripheral in both primary and post-primary 
schools. Scanners and digital (still) cameras were the next most widely used, with digital projectors 
being more common in post-primary schools than primary schools. Interactive whiteboards were 
generally uncommon in both primary and post-primary schools. 

Use of applications 

Some teachers were found to make effective use of computer applications to facilitate teaching and 
learning. (This was usually dependent on the class groups being taught at primary level and on the 
subject being taught at post-primary level.) The use of computer applications was prevalent in the 
area of special-needs education at both primary and post-primary level, but many teachers were 
uneasy about their ability to match applications (and other specialised technology) with students’ 
needs. It was also clear that many teachers in both primary and post-primary schools were unaware 
of the range of peripherals and applications already available to them in their school. 

180 



Main findings and recommendations Chapter 7 
Dedicated ICT facilities for teachers 

Schools that made dedicated computer facilities available to teachers reported that it led to 
improvements in the quality of the teaching resources used in classrooms. This was found to be 
more a feature of the post-primary level and included such strategies as making dedicated 
equipment available in staff rooms or work rooms or in a teacher’s classroom. Many primary schools 
did not have a staff room, and so this option was not open to them. A small number of schools 
provided ICT facilities for teachers’ home use. 

Local ICT advisory service 

The level of awareness among teachers of the local ICT advisory service was found to be quite low: 
fewer than half the respondents in both the primary and the post-primary national survey of 
teachers reported being aware of the service. Awareness was found to be higher, however, among 
ICT co-ordinators than among other teachers. The use of the ICT advisory service among those who 
were aware of it was also found to be low: at primary level only 22% of all respondents reported 
having used the service, while at post-primary level the corresponding figure was 15%. 

7.2.2 ICT planning 
Responsibility for ICT planning 

The evaluation found that the responsibility for ICT in a school can lie with an ICT steering 
committee, the principal, the deputy principal, an ICT co-ordinator, or a combination of these 
personnel. ICT steering committees were not prevalent in schools, while named ICT co-ordinators 
were more common in post-primary than primary schools. It was clear that greater efficiency was 
achieved where a named person had responsibility for ICT within a school and where their role was 
clearly defined. Few ICT co-ordinators had opportunities to work with colleagues regarding relevant 
ICT pedagogical issues. 

Schools’ ICT plans 

The majority of primary schools surveyed (71%) but fewer than half the post-primary schools (46%) 
were found to have a written ICT plan. These plans tended to concentrate more on infrastructural 
issues than on how ICT can be used to enhance teaching and learning. This finding was supported 
by inspectors’ analysis of ICT plans in the case-study schools visited. In schools that were found to 
engage in ICT planning there was usually a greater emphasis on whole-school ICT planning than on 
such planning at the level of the individual teacher. 

Acceptable-use policy (AUP) 

Most schools were found to have an acceptable-use policy (83% of primary schools surveyed, 87% 
of post-primary schools surveyed). This is an indication of the seriousness that schools attach to the 
risks associated with use of the internet and of the requirements of the Schools Broadband Access 
Programme. 

181 



ICT in Schools • Part 4 Summary of findings and recommendations 
Teachers’ use of ICT in planning and preparation 

The majority of teachers (both primary and post-primary) were found to make some use of ICT in 
their lesson planning and preparation work. Newly qualified teachers were more likely to use ICT for 
this purpose than their more experienced colleagues. However, fewer teachers were found to plan 
for the actual use of ICT in teaching and learning. At post-primary level, planning for the use of ICT 
in teaching and learning varied among subjects. The Transition Year, LCVP and LCA programmes 
were all found to encourage increased planning for the use of ICT in teaching and learning. 
Teachers of these programmes also regularly reported that their involvement encouraged them to 
use ICT in their work with other class groups. 

Future priorities for schools in ICT planning 

Principals and teachers identified the provision and maintenance of hardware in schools and the 
provision of teacher training in ICT as being strategically important with regard to the development 
of ICT in their schools. Generic programmes of professional development because of their very 
nature were found to attract large numbers of teachers. 

7.2.3 ICT in teaching and learning 
Teachers’ ICT skills 

In responses to their survey, only 30% of primary teachers and 25% of post-primary teachers 
reported themselves to be comfortable users of ICT; fewer again felt they knew how to apply it 
effectively in their teaching. Recently qualified teachers had a higher perception of their ICT skills 
than more experienced teachers. 

Use of ICT in teaching and learning 

While it is recognised that not all lessons lend themselves comfortably to the use of ICT, or indeed 
would benefit from it, it can be said that there is a limited integration of ICT in classrooms. At 
primary level inspectors reported evidence of the use of ICT to facilitate teaching and learning in 
59% of classroom observations carried out as part of WSEs. However, they observed ICT actually 
being used in only 22% of observed lessons. Furthermore, students in junior classes were found to 
experience a narrower range of ICT activity in their classrooms than those in senior classes. Nearly a 
quarter of all inspections revealed a competent or optimal level of performance in relation to the 
general use of ICT in the classroom. 

At post-primary level only 18% of the 311 lessons observed by inspectors involved an ICT-related 
activity. Students’ interaction with the technology was observed in only about a quarter of these 
instances. The most common ICT-related activity observed was the use of a computer and data 
projector to make a presentation to a class group. Inspectors judged that effective integration of ICT 
in teaching and learning was occurring in approximately half of the lessons in which they observed 
the use of ICT, i.e. in approximately 11% of all lessons observed. 

182 



Main findings and recommendations Chapter 7 
Teaching and learning that makes use of ICT, takes a number of different forms in schools. Individual 
students working at a computer in a classroom in rotation is the most frequently used method at 
primary level. At post-primary level the most popular approaches include whole-class teaching in a 
designated computer room as well as whole-class and individual work on computers in general or 
specialist classrooms. 

Dedicated ICT lessons 

At post-primary level, dedicated ICT lessons were found to be more prevalent among first-year class 
groups and their provision declined as students progressed through the junior cycle. The majority of 
schools were found to concentrate on providing students with dedicated ICT lessons in their 
Transition Year or for students following the LCVP or LCA programmes. The majority of post-primary 
schools provided ECDL courses, while slightly more than a quarter provided FETAC-accredited 
modules. The most popular topics taught in dedicated ICT lessons were word-processing, the 
internet, spreadsheets, and presentations. 

ICT and the curriculum 

Where ICT is used in primary classrooms it predominates in core curricular areas such as English and 
Mathematics, and in Social, Environmental and Scienctific Education (SESE). Furthermore, it is mainly 
used for the development of students’ writing, reading and numeracy skills; there is limited use of 
the technology in the development of higher-order thinking skills, creative or social skills, 
independent working skills, or communication skills. 

At post-primary level, high levels of integration of ICT were found in the science and applied science 
subjects as well as in the subjects of the social studies I group (History, Geography, Art, Craft and 
Design, Music). Subjects were also identified that rarely made use of ICT, the most notable being 
Irish. The main use for ICT in all subjects was the development of students’ research, investigation, 
writing and presentation skills. It was least likely to be used to develop teamwork and collaborative 
skills. 

Students’ ICT skills 

The survey of fifth-class students showed that many did not have the competence to complete basic 
tasks on the computer. While most reported that they were able to perform many of the most basic 
tasks, such as turning a computer on and off and opening or saving a file, more than 30% reported 
that they were not able to print a document or to go on the internet by themselves. Almost half 
(47%) reported not being able to create a document by themselves. The majority were unaware of 
how to create a presentation (72%), use a spreadsheet (86%), or send an attachment with an email 
message (88%). Competence in the use of ICT is limited, for the most part, to basic ICT skills, 
centred on the use of word-processing. 

In their survey, fifth-year students reported confidence in performing many basic computer 
operations by themselves, for example saving, printing, deleting, opening and editing a document. 

183 



ICT in Schools • Part 4 Summary of findings and recommendations 
It was found that, with some assistance, they could generally perform more complicated tasks, such 
as moving files, copying files to external storage devices, and writing and sending e-mail. A relatively 
low proportion reported being able to create a multimedia presentation. Students required most 
help in attaching a file to an e-mail message, constructing a web page, or dealing with computer 
viruses. While post-primary inspectors generally commented positively on the ICT work that they 
observed, they were also critical of the narrow range of work produced. 

ICT and education for students with special educational needs 

ICT is widely used to support schools’ provision of special education, more often by members of the 
special-education team than by mainstream class teachers. The emphasis of students’ engagement 
with ICT in special-education settings is mainly on the teaching of literacy. 

ICT and assessment 

No clear evidence was found of ICT being used in the assessment of students’ academic progress. 
The evaluation also found limited assessment being undertaken by schools of the development of 
students’ ICT skills. Furthermore, there was limited evidence of teachers engaging in the assessment 
of ICT-related activity in their classroom, or of its impact on teaching and learning. 

7.3 Main recommendations for policy-makers and 
policy advisors 
7.3.1 ICT infrastructure 
Improving schools’ ICT infrastructure 

The level of ICT infrastructure in schools needs to be improved. To ensure adequate access by 
students to ICT, Ireland should strive to reduce its student-computer ratio. A reduction in Ireland's 
SCR would have the effect of facilitating an increased permeation of ICT in all teaching and learning 
spaces. In this context, it is worth noting that countries that have taken the lead in this area, 
including Japan, Canada, Austria, New Zealand, Hungary, (South) Korea, Australia and the United 
States, are aiming for or achieving a SCR of 5:1 or less. 

Ireland should be working towards equipping not just all schools but all classrooms with an 
appropriate level of ICT infrastructure. Consideration should be given to equipping all classrooms 
with, at the least, a computer for teachers’ use, broadband internet access with adequate 
bandwidth, and a fixed data projector and screen for presentations. 

There is some evidence that growing numbers of schools are installing interactive whiteboards. 
While these whiteboards have considerable advantages, the cost of this technology is prohibitive 
and its use is heavily dependent on training and the presence of an ICT culture in schools. As 

184 



Main findings and recommendations Chapter 7 Main findings and recommendations Chapter 7 
recommended above, priority should be given to equipping each classroom with a computer and 
data projector. In due course, consideration should be given to how interactive whiteboards can be 
made available to schools over time. 

ICT technical support and maintenance 

Provision needs to be made for ICT technical support and maintenance for schools. While an 
increase in the level of ICT infrastructure in schools will go some way towards increasing their ICT 
capacity, this is not the only criterion for ensuring an increased impact of the technology on 
teaching and learning. ICT maintenance in schools needs to be addressed in a co-ordinated fashion 
at the system level, so that all schools can benefit from having a secure and reliable infrastructure 
that will facilitate the integration of ICT throughout the school. 

A strategy is required to ensure that a comprehensive ICT maintenance and support service is 
available to schools. A range of models whereby this service could be delivered needs to be 
explored. These models could include clustering schools for the purpose of taking out maintenance 
contracts with commercial IT companies, national or regional contracts for technical support for 
schools, or other options. The effectiveness of these models could be explored on a pilot basis 

185 



ICT in Schools • Part 4 Summary of findings and recommendations 
initially, so as to identify the most cost-effective and efficient way in which the necessary support 
could be provided to schools. 

ICT upgrading 

Funding for ICT infrastructure should not only provide schools with the capacity to acquire ICT 
facilities but also to regularly upgrade these facilities and to dispose of obsolete computers and 
other equipment in a planned way. This increased funding may be delivered by way of increased 
capitation grants or direct grants. As recommended in section 7.4.1 below, schools should plan to 
use the available funding to acquire ICT facilities, to provide for maintenance of their ICT systems 
and to manage their computer obsolescence more effectively. Advice regarding the spending of 
schools' ICT budgets could be provided by the NCTE and other relevant support services. 

Local ICT advisory service 

It is clear from the evaluation that the impact of the local ICT advisory service is limited. The 
technical dimension of ICT advisors’ role in an education centre could be more adequately fulfilled 
by other means as discussed under ICT technical support and maintenance above. Furthermore, the 
current pedagogical support role of the advisory service could be more appropriately provided by the 
relevant support services (for example the Primary Curriculum Support Programme and the Second-
Level Support Service, including the various support programmes for second-level subjects) in liaison 
with the ICT school co-ordinators. With an effective ICT maintenance system in place, the 
pedagogical role of school-based ICT co-ordinators could be enhanced and supported with 
appropriate training. 

7.3.2 Professional development needs of teachers 
ICT in teacher education 

There needs to be an increased emphasis on the application of ICT in teaching and learning in 
teacher education during pre-service, induction and in continuing professional development. The 
evaluation found that a lack of appropriate training for teachers acted as a major barrier to the 
effective use of ICT in schools. 

It is recommended that teacher education departments in third-level colleges should provide student 
teachers with the skills necessary to effectively use ICT in teaching and foster in them a culture of 
using ICT in their work. The colleges should also develop appropriate postgraduate courses to offer 
to the teaching profession in general, for example a higher diploma for school ICT co-ordinators. 
The resource demands of these developments need to be examined by the colleges and the 
appropriate funding bodies. 

Continuing professional development for teachers 

The IT 2000 initiative included the implementation of a national professional development initiative 
for teachers. This initiative attracted significant numbers of teachers at the time of its launch and its 

186 



Main findings and recommendations Chapter 7 Main findings and recommendations Chapter 7 
main emphasis was on the cultivation of basic ICT skills among teachers. While opportunities 
continue to be provided for teachers to engage with relevant professional development courses in 
ICT, consideration should now be given to expanding and extending significantly the current range 
of courses on offer. The main emphasis of this expanded initiative should be the development of 
teaching skills that facilitate the integration of ICT in teaching and learning. A major element of the 
initiative should have a subject-specific focus and should be developed and implemented in 
conjunction with the existing school support services. 

School support services 

School support services need to give priority in their work with schools to the integration of ICT in 
the teaching and learning process. Support services should work more closely with schools, and 
with schools’ ICT co-ordinators in particular, to determine the training needs of staff members and 
assist them in organising appropriate training programmes. Using ICT in lessons requires alternative 
teaching approaches and classroom practices. Particular attention, therefore, should be given to 
organising professional development courses that concentrate on the development of teaching 
methods that encourage the use of ICT. 

187 



ICT in Schools • Part 4 Summary of findings and recommendations 
Support services should also ensure that examples of how ICT can be used to facilitate teaching and 
learning are included in all general professional development programmes that they provide. Course 
organisers and presenters should take account of the wide range of ICT abilities and experience 
commonly found in groups of teachers when organising courses, and should employ strategies for 
working with mixed-ability groupings. 

Support for setting up an association of ICT co-ordinators 

ICT co-ordinators should be supported in setting up an association or network of schools’ ICT coordinators. 
Such a forum would allow co-ordinators to engage with a “community of practice” and 
to learn from one another. 

7.4 Main recommendations for schools 
7.4.1 ICT infrastructure in schools 
Budgeting for ICT 

Schools should move promptly in making use of any ICT grants they receive. Given the importance 
of technical support and maintenance in ensuring the continued operation of their ICT system, 
schools should endeavour to allocate a separate budget annually for the maintenance and 
development of their ICT systems. Furthermore, schools need to manage their computer 
obsolescence more effectively. 

Location of ICT resources in schools 

It is recommended that, as resources permit, schools should work towards providing all teaching 
and learning spaces with ICT facilities. This should include general classrooms and should not be 
confined to specialised rooms, as tends to be the case at present. As an interim measure schools 
could consider setting up a mobile ICT facility, comprising, for example, a laptop computer (or 
computers), a printer, and a digital projector. 

Schools with computer rooms should ensure that they are as fully accessible as possible. This could 
be achieved by a combination of effective timetabling and the adoption of a system that allows 
teachers to book the room as necessary. 

Schools should also explore ways of facilitating students with access to ICT facilities outside lesson 
times. The setting up of a computer club, for example, could contribute to making computer 
facilities more accessible to students. 

188 



Main findings and recommendations Chapter 7 
Developing ICT resources in schools 

As opportunities arise, schools should develop the range of ICT peripherals and software available to 
facilitate teaching and learning. Furthermore, efforts should be made to promote awareness within 
schools, particularly among staff members, of the availability of such resources. Schools should also 
carry out a regular ICT needs analysis in the area of special educational needs. This would help 
ensure the best match possible between specialised technology and software and the needs of 
students with special educational needs. 

ICT facilities for teachers 

Schools should endeavour to provide staff members with adequate access to ICT facilities for the 
purpose of planning and preparing for their teaching. Many schools have already done this by 
providing such facilities in their staff rooms or in work rooms. It should be remembered that the 
provision of facilities in individual classrooms could also provide teachers with access to ICT for 
planning and preparation purposes and not just for teaching purposes. Consideration could also be 
given to acquiring a small number of laptop computers, or other mobile facilities, that could be used 
by members of the staff at school or at home, as necessary. 

7.4.2 Planning for ICT in schools 
ICT co-ordinator 

To ensure efficiency in the organisation and capacity of a school’s ICT system, one member of the 
staff in every primary and post-primary school should take the lead in the management and coordination 
of ICT. It is also suggested that the duties of this staff member be incorporated in the 
school’s schedule of posts of responsibility. The duties attaching to such a post should be clearly 
specified and should include the following: 
• co-ordinating the production and development of the ICT plan 
• identifying training needs and facilitating staff training 
• developing strategies for the integration of ICT throughout the curriculum 
• liaison with the senior management and advising on ICT strategies 
• evaluating the use of ICT in the school and encouraging greater use by teachers and students 
• liaison with ICT maintenance personnel 
• developing and maintaining a school learning platform and web site. 

ICT steering committee 

Schools should consider convening an ICT steering committee, which could assist in managing the 
development of the ICT plan and in monitoring and reviewing its continuing implementation. 

ICT plan and an acceptable-use policy 

Schools should have an ICT plan and an AUP, both drawn up in consultation with all relevant 
stakeholders and both updated regularly. The plan should have a clear emphasis on the integration 

189 



ICT in Schools • Part 4 Summary of findings and recommendations ICT in Schools • Part 4 Summary of findings and recommendations 
of ICT in teaching and learning throughout the curriculum. Ideally it should include guidelines for 
teachers in setting out appropriate learning objectives for each class level in relation to the use of 
ICT in supporting the implementation of the curriculum. 

ICT and individual teachers’ planning 

All teachers should exploit the benefits to be gained from ICT in their lesson planning and 
preparation. They should endeavour, for example, to make more use of Scoilnet. Ready access by 
teachers to computer facilities and the internet would obviously aid this process. Furthermore, 
teachers should plan for the integration of ICT in all aspects of their teaching, as appropriate. As 
resources become more readily available, so too should their use in the classroom. 

Using support services 

Schools should monitor the ICT training needs of their staff and develop and implement professional 
development plans as appropriate. Professional development opportunities for teachers should 

190 



Main findings and recommendations Chapter 7 
concentrate on the integration of ICT in teaching and learning. Schools should utilise the services of 
their local education centre, and other relevant school support services, as fully as possible, in 
planning and delivering professional support to teachers, and in planning and developing their ICT 
infrastructure. 

7.4.3 ICT in teaching and learning 
Integrating ICT in teaching and learning 

The process of school and teacher self-review should support the effective integration of ICT 
throughout the school curriculum. As schools review and seek to improve the quality of teaching 
and learning in curricular areas and subjects, they should examine their current and potential use of 
ICT. School self-review should include regular audits of ICT facilities in all classrooms and subjects, 
and should gather information on how effectively existing available resources are being used. 

Schools should endeavour to adopt mechanisms to facilitate the sharing of good practice among 
staff members. For example, teachers with good ICT skills and who make effective use of ICT in 
their own classrooms could act as mentors to colleagues whose ICT skills are not as well developed. 

Schools should endeavour to provide all their students with an appropriate and equitable level of 
experience of ICT at all class levels at primary level and at both junior cycle and senior cycle at post-
primary level. 

Teachers should regularly review their use of ICT with a view to expanding the settings in which it 
can be used and their repertoire of teaching strategies, including opportunities for students’ 
engagement with the technology. This should include exploring the use of as wide a range of 
resources and applications as possible, for example educational software, peripherals, e-mail, 
presentation software, and the internet. 

Teachers should also exploit the potential of ICT to develop as wide a range of students’ skills as 
possible, including research and investigation skills, writing and presentation skills, communication 
skills, teamwork and collaborative skills, and the higher-order skills of problem-solving, analysis, and 
evaluation. 

If schools are providing a programme of discrete ICT lessons at post-primary level, the content of the 
programme should reflect closely the existing level of the students’ ICT skills. Any syllabus developed 
by the school should have the effect of expanding on the students’ knowledge and their repertoire 
of ICT skills. 

191 



ICT in Schools • Part 4 Summary of findings and recommendations 
ICT and students with special educational needs 

Schools should exploit more fully the potential of ICT to support the learning needs of students with 
special educational needs. Currently, ICT is used mainly to support the acquisition of literacy, but the 
technology has the potential for much wider application in special education settings and for 
supporting students with special educational needs within mainstream classrooms. 

ICT and assessment 

Schools should develop strategies for evaluating the impact of ICT at different levels in the school, 
so that staff members are confident in assessing its influence on teaching and learning. 

Schools should exploit the benefits of ICT in their assessment procedures and practices beyond 
purely administrative functions. This could include using ICT to assess, track and analyse students’ 
progress through the use of appropriate software. Consideration could also be given to assessing 
students’ ICT skill levels at particular times during their schooling. 

192 



References & Appendix 
193References & Appendix 
193

ICT in Schools 
References 

Accenture (2004). ICT—the Indispensable Sector in the Knowledge Based Economy. Dublin: ICT 
Ireland. 

Barton, R. (1997). “Computer aided graphing a comparative study.” Journal of Information 
Technology for Teacher Education, 6(1), 59-72. 

Barton, R. (1998). “IT in practical work: assessing and increasing the value added.” In J. Wellington 
(Ed.), Practical work in school science: which way now? London: Routledge. 

Department for Education and Skills (2004). DfES Annual Survey of Information and 
Communications Technology in Schools. Retrieved 5 March 2007, from 
http://www.dfes.gov.uk/rsgateway/DB/SFR/s000480/SFR27-2004v6.pdf 

Department of Education (1995). Charting our Education Future: White Paper on Education. Dublin: 
Stationery Office. 

Department of Education and Science (1997). Schools IT 2000: A Policy Framework for the New 
Millennium. Dublin: Stationery Office 

Department of Education and Science (1999). Primary School Curriculum. Dublin: Stationery Office. 

Department of Education and Science (2005). An Evaluation of Curriculum Implementation in 
Primary Schools: English, Mathematics and Visual Arts. Dublin: Stationery Office. 

Department of Education and Science (2006). Rules and Programme for Secondary Schools. Dublin: 
Stationery Office. 

Department of Enterprise Trade and Employment (2006). Strategy for Science, Technology and 
Innovation 2006-2013. Dublin: Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment. 

Department of the Taoiseach (2006). Towards 2016 - Ten-Year Framework Social Partnership 
Agreement 2006-2015. Dublin: Department of the Taoiseach. 

Forfás (2005). Skills Needs in the Irish Economy: The Role of Migration. Dublin: Expert Group on 
Future Skills Needs/Forfás. 

Harris, J. (2006). Irish in Primary Schools: Long Term National Trends in Achievement. Dublin: 
Department of Education and Science. 

Harrison, C., Comber, C., Fisher, T., Haw, K., Lewin, C., & Lunzer, E. (2003). The Impact of 
Information and Communication Technologies on Pupil Learning and Attainment London: 
Becta. 

Haydn, T. (2001). Subject Discipline Dimensions of ICT and Learning: History, a Case Study. Retrieved 
December 03, 2005, 2, from http://www.centres.ex.ac.uk/historyresource/journal3/haydn.doc 

IMD (2003). World Competitiveness Yearbook 2003 Lausanne, Switzerland: IMD. 

194 



References & Appendices 
Irish Council for Science Technology and Innovation (1999). Technology Foresight Report. Dublin: 
Irish Council for Science, Technology and Innovation. 

Kompf, M. (2005). “Information and Communications Technology (ICT) and the Seduction of 
Knowledge, Teaching, and Learning: What Lies Ahead for Education.” Curriculum Inquiry, 35(2). 

National Centre for Technology in Education (2000). Information and Advice: Special Educational 
Needs and Information and Communications Technology. Dublin: National Centre for Technology in 
Education. 

National Centre for Technology in Education (2002). Planning and Advice for Schools. Dublin: 
National Centre for Technology in Education. 

National Centre for Technology in Education (2006). Engaging Learners - Mobile Technology, 
Literacy and Inclusion. Dublin: Brunswick Press Ltd. 

National Competitiveness Council (2006). Annual Competitiveness Report 2006, Volume 1: 
Benchmarking Ireland's Performance. Dublin: National Competitiveness Council. 

National Council for Curriculum and Assessment (2004a). Information and Communications 
Technology (ICT) in the Primary School Curriculum Guidelines for Teachers. Dublin: National Council 
for Curriculum and Assessment. 

National Council for Curriculum and Assessment (2004b). Curriculum, Assessment and ICT in the 
Irish Context: A Discussion paper. Dublin: National Council for Curriculum and Assessment. 

National Council for Curriculum and Assessment (2005). Primary Curriculum Review: Phase 1 (Final 
Report). Dublin: Government of Ireland. 

National Policy Advisory and Development Committee (2001). The Impact of Schools IT 2000. 
Dublin: National Policy Advisory and Development Committee. 

O'Doherty, T., Gleeson, J., Johnson, K., McGarr, O., & Moody, J. (2001). Computers and Curriculum Difficulties 
and Dichotomies. Dublin: National Council for Curriculum and Assessment. 

O'Doherty, T., Gleeson, J., Moody, J., Johnson, K., Kiely, L., & McGarr, O. (2000). An Investigation 
into the Interest in and Feasibility of Introducing a Computer-based Subject to the Established 
Leaving Certificate Programme. Dublin: National Council for Curriculum and Assessment. 

OECD (2001). Learning to Change: ICT in Schools. Paris: OECD. 

OECD (2003). OECD Science, Technology and Industry Scoreboard 2003 - Towards a Knowledge-
Based Economy. Paris: OECD. 

OECD (2006a). Are Students Ready for a Technology-Rich World? What PISA Tells Us. Paris: OECD. 

OECD (2006b). OECD Broadband Statistics to June 2006. Retrieved 01 December 2006, from 
www.oecd.org/sti/ict/broadband 

Ofsted (2004). ICT in Schools: The Impact of Government Initiatives Five Years On. London: Ofsted. 

195 



ICT in Schools 
Papert, S. (1990). A Critique of Technocentrism in Thinking About the School of the Future. 
Retrieved 10 March 2005, from http://www.papert.org/articles/ACritiqueofTechnocentrism.html 

Shiel, G., & O’Flaherty, A. (2006). NCTE 2005 Census on ICT Infrastructure in Schools: Statistical 
Report. Dublin: National Centre for Technology in Education. 

Tearle, P. (2004). “A theoretical and instrumental framework for implementing change in ICT in 
education.” Cambridge Journal of Education, 34(3), pp331-351. 

van Oel, B. J. (2004). ERNIST ICT School Portraits Summary Document. Netherlands: Inspectorate of 
Education. 

196 



References & Appendices 
NCTE ICT planning matrix 

The ICT planning matrix is designed to help schools establish their level of development with regard 
to the use of ICT. It includes a wide range of issues for consideration in the development of a 
school’s ICT plan. Within the categories of the matrix, issues are discussed in accordance with 
certain criteria, and these are graded into three stages of integration: initial, intermediate, and 
advanced. 

The matrix offers a clear means of assessing a school’s ICT status. Schools may find that they are 
primarily in the advanced stage as regards their ICT resources and infrastructure but are in the initial 
stage when it comes to ICT and the curriculum. Having established that this is the case, such a 
school should give priority to the integration of ICT throughout the curriculum. 

The integration of ICT is not simply a linear process, with a clear beginning, middle, and end. Every 
school needs to analyse its present position with regard to ICT integration and to develop a plan 
that will allow it to progress to the next stage. 

It is recommended that each school work through the ICT planning matrix to identify its strengths 
and weaknesses with regard to the current use of ICT within the school. Having established their 
strengths, they should then grade their weaknesses under the five headings and devise a realistic 
plan to progress to the next level. Such a process should be monitored regularly to ensure that 
progress is being made. The five categories are: 
• Management and planning 
• ICT and the curriculum 
• Professional development of staff members 
• School’s ICT culture 
• ICT resources and infrastructure. 

Management and planning 

Is your school at the initial, intermediate or advanced stage for ICT management and planning? 

Initial ICT plan is developed 
Intermediate ICT plan is regularly updated 
Advanced ICT planning is considered an integral part of general school planning 

Initial ICT plan is developed by one or a few individual teachers 
Intermediate All staff members are given the opportunity to make an input to the ICT plan 
Advanced A team approach is adopted for ICT planning and integration 

197 



ICT in Schools 
Initial No teacher is co-ordinating the integration of ICT within the school 
Intermediate One teacher or a group of teachers informally assume responsibility for ICT in the school 
Advanced There is a designated co-ordinating teacher 

Initial The ICT plan concentrates heavily on computer hardware and the acquisition of basic skills 
Intermediate The school enlists the support of the local ICT advisor or ICT support group network 
Advanced The school ethos encourages the exploration of new approaches to ICT integration 

Initial An audit of ICT resources has not been carried out 
Intermediate The process of identifying relevant software and internet resources in all subject and special-needs areas 
has begun 
Advanced An annual audit and needs assessment of ICT infrastructure is conducted, in terms of the curriculum 
needs of all classes, subject areas, and special needs 

Initial The extent and level of ICT use is decided by each teacher individually 
Intermediate The principal is active in integrating ICT throughout the school 
Advanced The impact of ICT in all areas of teaching and learning is regularly reviewed 

Initial The ICT plan concentrates on equipment rather than on the school’s usage policy 
Intermediate Health and safety standards are considered when writing the ICT plan 
Advanced A range of school ICT policies is developed, for example use of the internet, use of applications, health and 
safety issues, and management of ICT resources 

Initial An internet usage policy does not exist, as internet access is restricted to staff members 
Intermediate A basic internet use policy is developed 
Advanced An acceptable-use policy (for internet use) is developed with the involvement of parents 

ICT and the curriculum 

Is your school at the initial, intermediate or advanced stage for ICT and the curriculum? 

Initial Students and teachers acquire basic ICT skills 
Intermediate ICT is integrated in a number of subject areas 
Advanced ICT is integrated in project-based learning 

Initial ICT is considered a stand-alone activity 
Intermediate A range of ICT issues is commonplace (teachers’ preparation and classroom management; whole-class 
teaching; group and individual work) 
Advanced Teachers and students use open-ended software to support curriculum activities, for example Logo, 
authoring, programming 

Initial Students use computers in isolation from the school curriculum 
Intermediate E-mail is incorporated in the communicative and research aspects of the curriculum 
Advanced Teachers and students use ICT to create digital content, for example project presentations, web and 
multimedia authoring, students’ electronic portfolios 

198 



References & Appendices 
Initial Internet use is confined mostly to e-mail and web browsing 
Intermediate The web is used as part of general class teaching 
Advanced Students use ICT to collaborate on curriculum activities, both within the school and with other schools 

Initial ICT use is experimental, and the emphasis is on applications, such as word-processing 
Intermediate ICT use reinforces existing curriculum activities 
Advanced Problem-solving and questioning learning approaches are supported by ICT 

Staff development 

Is your school at the initial, intermediate or advanced stage for staff development in ICT? 

Initial Some staff members have participated in basic skills training 
Intermediate All staff members have met the level of basic skills training 
Advanced Staff members are participating in third-level ICT professional development 

Initial Staff members are aware of training opportunities 
Intermediate Specialist staff members have received or are receiving appropriate skills training 
Advanced Staff members are investigating new hardware and software solutions 

Initial No contact has been made with the local ICT advisor 
Intermediate The school has contacted the local ICT advisor for support 
Advanced Staff members are actively sharing new ideas with each other and with other teachers 

Initial Staff members have not been encouraged to attend ICT courses 
Intermediate Some staff members have participated in, or are participating in, ICT courses emphasising the integration 
of ICT in the classroom 
Advanced Staff members are integrating relevant solutions in their teaching 

Initial Staff members are not aware of local ICT support structures 
Intermediate Members of the staff are attending relevant ICT support group meetings 
Advanced Staff members are participating in on-line ICT support groups 

School ICT culture 

Is your school’s ICT culture at the initial, intermediate or advanced stage? 

Initial Students are guaranteed a “turn” on the computers 
Intermediate Structured ICT access is available during school time 
Advanced The school environment encourages independent ICT use by both teachers and students 

Initial Teachers have limited access to computers during school hours 
Intermediate ICT access is facilitated outside teaching time 
Advanced ICT use outside normal teaching time is encouraged 

Initial Classroom displays are supported by computer-produced labels 
Intermediate Classroom displays contain computer-produced content 
Advanced Computers are considered a school resource that students can use to support their work when applicable 

199 



ICT in Schools 
Initial The school does not have a web site 
Intermediate The school has an active and up-to-date web site with some student involvement 
Advanced The school web site is developed and maintained by teachers and students; it concentrates on students’ 
activities and curriculum resources 

Initial The school does not engage with other schools on ICT issues 
Intermediate The school is involved in ICT projects (national or international) 
Advanced The school is seen as an exemplar of best practice by other schools 

Initial Computers are used reluctantly by teachers 
Intermediate The school is an “ICT-friendly” zone 
Advanced A positive, supportive ICT culture exists throughout the school 

ICT resources and infrastructure 

Are the ICT resources and infrastructure in your school at the initial, intermediate or advanced 
stage? 

Initial Computers are confined to a computer room 
Intermediate Computers are located throughout the school in classrooms 
Advanced A network of computers is distributed throughout the school 

Initial Computers are not networked 
Intermediate There is a peer-to-peer network within the computer room but not throughout the school 
Advanced All computers are networked; internet access is available throughout the school 

Initial There is no provision for technical support 
Intermediate Provision is made for the maintenance of computers 
Advanced A technical support contract exists 

Initial There is an internet connection through one telephone line to a computer 
Intermediate There is an internet connection via ISDN to most computers 
Advanced There is an internet connections to all computers via multiple ISDN, leased line, ADSL, or broadband cable 

Initial Limited software is available, but not enough for all classes, all subject areas, or all students with special 
needs 
Intermediate Some software and internet resources are available for each class or year level; multiple licences have 
been obtained for whole-class use 
Advanced Appropriate software and internet resources are identified and made available by age, subject, and special 
need 

Initial Desktop computers and printers are the only ICT equipment available in the school 
Intermediate A digital camera (or cameras) and scanner (or scanners) are used for project and web site work 
Advanced A digital projector (or projectors) and interactive whiteboard (or whiteboards) are in use throughout the 
school 

200 



References & Appendices 
Initial Some computer equipment does not work and has not been repaired or replaced 
Intermediate Equipment is fixed or replaced only when absolutely necessary 
Advanced Provision is made for regular renewal of equipment 

201 



ICT in Schools 
202 



203 



ICT in Schools 
204 



