Chapter 5 

What happens after people elect their 
representatives? How are decisions made? Let's 
look at how this takes place in rural areas. Here, 
we look at the Gram Sabha, which is a meeting

Panchayati Raj 

where people directly participate and seek 

answers from their elected representatives. 

The people of Hardas village are keen 
to find out what their new Panchayat 
t's a special day today! Everyone's 
rushing to get to the Gram Sabha!

I 

Do you know why? Because the Gram 
Sabha is holding its first meeting after 
theelection of thenew Gram Panchayat. 

The Gram Sabha is a meeting of all 
adults who live in the area covered 
by a Panchayat. This could be only 
one village or a few villages. In some 
states, as in the example above, a 
village meeting is held for each 
village. Anyone who is 18 years old 
or more and who has the right to vote 
is a member of the Gram Sabha. 
leaders have planned for the village. 

Gram Sabha 

The Gram Sabha meeting begins with 
the Panchayat President (who is also 
called the Sarpanch) and the members 
of the Panchayat (the Panchs) 
presenting a plan on repairing the road 
that connects the village to the main 
highway. After this, the discussion 
moves to the subject of water and 
water shortages. 



44 / Social and Political Life 

Every village Panchayat is 
divided into wards, i.e. smaller 
areas. Each ward elects a 
representative who is known as 
the Ward Member (Panch). All 
the members of the Gram Sabha 
also elect a Sarpanch who is the 
Panchayat President. The Ward 
Panchs and the Sarpanch form 
the Gram Panchayat. The Gram 
Panchayat is elected for five 
years. 
The Gram Panchayat has a 
Secretary who is also the 
Secretary of the Gram Sabha. 
This person is not an elected 
person but is appointed by the 
government. The Secretary is 
responsible for calling the 
meeting of the Gram Sabha and 
Gram Panchayat and keeping a 
record of the proceedings. 
A villager called Tijia begins the 
meeting by saying, "The water problem 
in Hardas has become very acute. The 
hand pump water has gone well below 
the point up to which the ground has 
been drilled. We hardly get any water 
in the taps. Women have to go to the 
Suru river which is 3 k.m. away to get 
water." One of the members suggests 
piping water from the Suru and making 
an overhead tank in the village to 
increase the supply. But the others 
think that this will be expensive. It's 
better, they feel, to deepen the 
handpumps and clean the wells for this 
season. Tijia says, "This is not enough. 

We need to do something more 
permanent as groundwater levels seem 
to be going down every year. We're 
using more water than is seeping into 
the ground." 

Another member, Anwar then tells 
everyone that he has seen ways of 
conserving water and recharging 
(refilling) it in a village in Maharashtra 
where he'd once gone to visit his 
brother. It was called watershed 
development and he had heard that the 
government gave money for this work. 

In his brother's village people had 
planted trees, constructed check-dams 
and tanks. Everyone thought this was 
an interesting idea and the Gram 
Panchayat was asked to find out about 
it in detail. 

1. What is a Gram Sabha? 
2. In the meeting of the Gram 
Sabha so far what are the 
problems that are being 
discussed? What sort of solutions 
are being suggested? 
The next item on the agenda for the 
Gram Sabha is the finalisation of the 
list of people below the poverty line 
(BPL) which had to be approved by the 
Gram Sabha. As soon as the list is read 
out people begin to whisper. "Natwar 
has just bought a colour T.V. and his 
son has sent him a new motorcycle. 
How can he be below the poverty line?" 
Soorajmal mutters to the person sitting 
next to him. Saroj says to Sukhi bai 
"How did Birju's name get on to the list? 
He has so much land. This list should 



Panchayati a / 45 

The Gram Sabha is a 
key factor in making 
the Gram Panchayat 
play its role and be 
responsible. It is the 
place where all plans for 
the work of the Gram 
Panchayat are placed 
before the people. 
The Gram Sabha 
prevents the Panchayat 
from doing wrong things 
like misusing money 
or favouring certain 
people. It plays an 
important role in keeping 
an eye on the elected 
representatives and in 
making them responsible 
to the persons who 
elected them. 
have only poor people. And Om 
Prakash is a landless labourer who can 
barely make ends meet, yet his name is 
not on the list." "You know that both 
Natwar and Birju are friends of 
Amirchand's. Who can counter 
Amirchand's power?' Sukhi Bai says, 
"Amirchand was the earlier Zamindar 
(landowner) of the village and still has 
control over a lot of land. But we should 
get Om Prakash's name put in." 

The Sarpanch (Panchayat President) 
notices people whispering and 
asks if anyone has anything to say. 
Saroj tries to provoke Soorajmal to ask 
about Natwar and Birju. But he keeps 
quiet. Amirchand is sitting in the Gram 
Sabha keeping an eye on everyone. 
Then Saroj gets up and says that Om 
Prakash's name should be in the BPL 
list. Others agree that he and his family 
are very poor. The Sarpanch asks how 
his name had been missed out. The 
teacher who did the survey of BPL 

families says, "Om Prakash's house 
was locked when I went there. He may 
have gone somewhere to look for work." 
The Sarpanch gives instructions that 
Om Prakash's family income be looked 
at and if it is less than what has been 
decided by the government, his name 
should be included in the list. 

1. Was there a problem with the BPL 
list that the Gram Sabha was 
finalising? What was this problem? 
2. Why do you think Soorajmal kept 
quiet even though Saroj asked him to 
speak? 
3. Have you seen any similar 
incidents when people are unable to 
speak for themselves? Why do you 
think that happened and what 
prevented the person from speaking? 
4. How can the Gram Sabha prevent 
the Panchayat from doing what it 
likes? 

46 / Social and Political Life 

The Gram Panchayat 

The Gram Panchayat meets regularly 
and one of its main tasks is to 
implement development programmes 
for all villages that come under it. As 
you have seen, the work of the Gram 
Panchayat has to be approved by the 
Gram Sabha. 

In some states, Gram Sabhas form 
committees like construction and 
development committees. These 
committees include some members of 
the Gram Sabha and some from the 
Gram Panchayat who work together to 
carry out specific tasks. 

Two village Panchs from Maharashtra who were 
awarded the Nirmal Gram Puruskar in 2005 for 
the excellent work done by them in the Panchayat. 


The work of a Gram Panchayat 
includes 
1. The construction and maintenance 
of water sources, roads, drainage, 
school buildings and other 
common property resources. 
2. Levying and collecting local taxes. 
3. Executing government schemes 
related to generating employment 
in the village. 
Sources of funds for the 
Panchayat 
Collection of taxes on houses, 
market places etc. 
Government scheme funds received 
through various departments of the 
government – through the Janpad 
and Zila Panchayats. 
Donations for community works etc. 
Let's see what the Hardas Gram 
Panchayat was able to do. 

Do you remember the options that 
were suggested to solve the water 
problem in the Gram Sabha of Hardas 
village? When the Hardas Gram 
Panchayat held a meeting, this point 
was brought up again by some of the 
members (Panchs). This meeting was 
attended by the Sarpanch, Ward 
Members (Panchs) and the Secretary. 

Gram Panchayat members first 
discussed the suggestion to deepen two 
handpumps and clean one well, so that 
the village would not go without water. 
The Sarpanch (Panchayat President) 
suggested that since the Panchayat had 
received some money for maintenance 
of handpumps, this could be used 



for completing this work. The 
members agreed and the Secretary 
recorded their decision. 

The members then went on to 
discuss the options for a long-term 
solution. They were sure that the 
Gram Sabha members would ask 
questions at the next meeting. Some 
Panchs asked whether the watershed 
programme would make a substantial 
difference to the water level. A lot of 
discussion followed. In the end it was 
decided that the Gram Panchayat 
would approach the Block 
Development Officer and get more 
information on the scheme. 

What decisions were taken by the 
Gram panchayat? 
Do you think it was necessary for 
them to take these decisions? 
Why? 
From the above description, write 
down one question that people 
could ask of the Panchayat in the 
next Gram Sabha meeting. 
Panchayati a / 47 

Watershed management has transformed 
this barren slope to a green meadow in 
just two years. 

Three Levels of Panchayats 

After reading about what happened in 
the Gram Sabha and the Gram 
Panchayat in Hardas village you can 
understand that the Panchayati Raj 
System is a process through which 
people participate in their own 
government. The Panchayati Raj 
system is the first tier or level of 
democratic government. The Panchs 
and the Gram Panchayat are 
answerable to the Gram Sabha 
because it is the members of the Gram 
Sabha who elected them. 

This idea of people's participation 
in the Panchayati Raj system extends 
to two other levels. One is the Block 
level, which is called the Janpad 
Panchayat or the Panchayat Samiti. 
The Panchayat Samiti has many Gram 
Panchayats under it. Above the 
Panchayat Samiti is the District 
Panchayat or the Zila Parishad. The 



48 / Social and Political Life 

Zila Parishad actually makes more and more space for people to 
developmental plans at the district participate and raise their voices. 
level. With the help of Panchayat 
Samitis, it also regulates the money 
distribution among all the Gram 
Panchayats. 
Within the guidelines given in the 
Constitution each state in the country 
has its own laws with regard to 
Panchayats. The idea is to provide 

Ask your teacher to invite any of 
the elected persons such as the 
Panch, Sarpanch (Panchayat 
President) or member of the 
Janpad or Zila Panchayat and 
interview them on their work and 
the projects undertaken by them. 
QUESTIONS 

1. What problem did the villagers in Hardas village face? What did they do to 
solve this problem? 
2. What, in your opinion, is the importance of the Gram Sabha? Do you think 
all members should attend Gram Sabha meetings? Why? 
3. What is the link between a Gram Sabha and a Gram Panchayat? 
4. Take an example of any one task done by a Panchayat in your area/nearby 
rural area and find out the following: 
a. Why it was taken up. 
b. Where the money came from. 
c. Whether or not the work has been completed. 
5. What is the difference between a Gram Sabha and a Gram Panchayat? 
6. Read the following news item. 
Nimone is a village on the Chauphula-Shirur Road. Like many others, this village 
has also been facing a severe water shortage for the last few months and villagers 
depend on tankers for all their needs. Bhagvan Mahadeo Lad (35) of this village was 
beaten with sticks, iron rods and axes by a group of seven men. The incident came 
to light when some villagers brought a badly injured Lad to hospital for treatment. 
In the FIR recorded by the police Lad said that he was attacked when he insisted 
that the water in the tanker must be emptied into the storage tanks constructed as 
part of the water supply scheme by Nimone Gram Panchayat so that there would be 
equal distribution of water. However, he alleged that the upper caste men were 
against this and told him that the tanker water was not meant for the lower castes. 
Adapted from Indian Express, May 1, 2004 

a. Why was Bhagvan beaten? 
b. Do you think that the above is a case of discrimination? Why? 
7. Find out more about watershed development and how it benefits an area? 
