
Chapter 4 

NON-METRIC GEOMETRY 

The principal objectives of this chapter are threefold: 

(1) To introduce pupils to geometric ideas and ways of 
thought, 

(2) To give pupils some familiarity with the terminology 
and notatlon of "sets" and geometry, and 
(3) To encourage precision of language and thought. 
There is an attempt to guide the student to the discovery of 
unifying concepts as a basis for learning some of the more specif-
ic details. This chapter forms a background for Chapters 7, 9, 
and 10, which deal with metric or dfstance properties. It attempts 
to focua attention on ideas whlch are fundamental but whlch (while 
sometimes vaguely taken for granted) are often poorly understood 
by students. 

Traditionally, these ideas have been taught when they were 
needed for a particular geometric discussion. But, all too often 
the teacher has assumed that these properties are obvious or clear 
without mentioning them. Also, there should be some advantage in 
considering together this group of closely related analagous 
properties and observing relations among them. The higher level 
study of some aspects of non-metric geometry has become a separate 
mathematical discipline mown as projective geometry. 

Readinq the ~cxt. This chapter has been written with the 
intent that it be carefully read by students. We suggest that not 
only should students be aasigned to read the material, but that 
they also be encouraged to study it. Reading mathematics is not 
like reading a novel. Students may find it necessary to "get in 
and digt'for ideas. Aft;er Section 4-2, students should be advised 
to read with a paper and pencil at hand so that they may draw 
diagrams to assist their understanding. 

Precision -of Langua~e. Pupils should be encouraged to ex-
press themselves accurately. Some pupils will be able to do much 
better than others. 


Spatial Perception. It has been our effort here to help 
boys and girls develop spatial understanding, We do this In 
part by representations -inspace. We hope that suggestions given 
to the students and the notes here may be helpful in selecting 
other representations appropriate for your class. Thls course is 

-not a 12th grade course. It Is intended to provide background 
which is sometimes assumed in later courses. 
Testinq. In testing, try to test for grasp of ideas, not 
for mere recall. Students should be encouraged to express Ideas 
in thelr own words. Because abilities in geometric perception 
and understanding differ from abilities in arithmetic, you may 
observe some redistribution of high and low grades among your 

Time Schedule. The following time schedule is suggested: 

1st week Sections 1 through 4 

2nd week Sections 5 through 7 or 8 

3rd week Remainder of chapter including test 

evaluation. 
High ability classes may do the chapter in 11 days including 
the test. 

Each section was conceived as a one-day section. It seems 
possible that Sections 3 and 5 may take 2 days each and that an 
extra day or so might be spread over Sectlons 8, 9, 10. We 
believe all sections are Important. We have tried to order the 
sections so that the ideas do not become more difficult. In fact, 
the second half of the chapter which deals less with spatial 
perception may well be easier for some students. Some students 
will particularly enjoy Sections 8 and 10. If a class is under 
great time pressure, Section 9 might be omitted. If so, it 
should be assigned to all the better students. 

Materials, 

Inslghts lnto Ideas developed in this chapter will be greatly 
enhanced by use of instructional devices. Encourage students to 
make simple models as a means of helping in basic understandings. 
hphasize ideas, not evaluation of models. As in usfng any 


instructional material of this kind, seek understanding of ideas 

without over-dependence upon representations. 

Sqxested Materials: 

String--to represent lines in space. 
Paper--to represent planes, and folded to represent 
lines and intersections of planes. 
Tape or tacks for attaching string to walls, floor, 
other points in the room. 
Model (as illustrated) 

Suggest making the model as shown above by using a card-
board carton (or, it can be-made with heavy paper, 
oak tag, screen wire). Cut away two sides so that 
only 2 adjacent sides and bottom of box remain. 
String, WIT, may be used to extend through

etc. 

and beyond sides,I' "floor," etc. 
Oak tag for making models to be used by both teacher 

and students. 
Coat-hanger wire, knitting needles, pickup sticks. 
Sclsaors, colored chalk. 
Light-weight paper (for tracing In exercises). 
Yardstick or meter stick with several lengths of string

tied to it at different intervals. fastenfng 
stick to wall, lines may be represented by holding 
the string taut. gatherfng together the free 
end8 at one point the plane containing the point 
and the yardstick may be shown. 

Optional: 

Long pointer for seeing lines. 
Tinker-Toys for bullding models. 
Toothpicks for student models. 
Saran wrap, cellophane, and wire frame for representing 

planes. 


4-1. Points, Lines and Space.

-J -

Page 105. 

I. Understandings; 
(a) A point has no size. 
(b) A line is a certain set of points. 
(c) A line is unlimited in extent. 
(d) Through two points there is one and only one llne. 
(e) Space Is a set of points. 
2. Teaching Suagestions: 
Just as we use representations to develop the concept of the 
I1 counting numberst1 (2 cars, 2 people, 2 hands, 2 balls, 2 chairs, 
etc., to develop the concept of twoness) similarly we must select 
representations for developing the concepts of point, line, plane, 
and space. 

Point. Identify things which suggest the idea of a point 
keeping in mind that one suggestion by itself is not adequate for 
developing the Idea of a point. One needs to use many IllustraUms 
in different situations. Suggestions: tip or pencil, needle, 
pointer; collection of boxes, putting one inside another and 
always being able to place one more inside of the last and 
the point indicated as being in all the boxes; pupil of the eye 
in Intense brightness; progressive closure of shutter of camera; 
dot or light on some TV screens; particle of' dust in the air. 

Llne. Identify two points using some of the situations a8 
above, such as tips of two pencils, etc. Bring out the idea that 
given these two point8 there are many other points on the line 
that contain them. Some of these are between the two points, some 
are "beyond1'the one, and some are "beyond" the other. Also, 
through two points there can be only one llne. The llne hae no 
thickness and no width. It is considered to extend indefinitely. 
Use string held taut between two points to show representations of 
lines in positions that are horizontal, vertical, and slanting. 
Each student may repre~entlines by using a pencil between Ns 
fingertips. With each example talk about thinking of a line as 
unlimited in extent. Rnphaslze frequently that we use the word, 
IIllne, !I to mean atralght line. Identie other repreeentationa of 


lines such as: edge of tablet (holding tablet in various posi-
tions); edge of desk; vapor trails; edges of roof of building; 

etc. It 5s important to select illustrations representing lines 

In space as well as the usual representations made by drawing on 

chalkboard and paper. 

Space-. Models will be most helpful here. Using $8 string on 
yardstick" and considering some point on a table, desk, or on 
some object which all students can see, let all the representatims 
of lines from the yardstick pass through the point. Also, use 
string to show representations of other lines from other points 
on different walls, the floor, etc., all passing through the 
point. Use the model as described in drawing under "Suggested 

ater rials .I' Pass lines (string, wire, thread) through "walls" 
and "floor" to suggest infinite number of lines and that these 
lines extend indefinitely. Bring out the idea that each line 
is a set of points, and that space is made up of all the points 
on all such lines. 

STRINGS 

Answers to Class Discussion Problems in !A-1. 

1. Depends on what objects are in the room. 
2. The body of the porcupine is like the point. The quills 
are like llnes through this point. 
Answers -to mercises 4-1. Page 108. 

1. No, the pibbons are usually not straight. 
2 There is exactly one line containing the two points on 
the monuments. 

3. The line of the new string passes through the same two 
points as the line of the old. (~~operty
1.) 

[pages 106-1083 


Planes. 

Page 108. 

1. Understandinqs. 
(a) A plane is a set of points in space. 
(b) If a line contains twa different points of a plane, it 
lies in the plane. 
(c) Many different planes contain a particular pair of 
points. 

(d) Three points not exactly in a straight llne determine 
a unique plane, 
2. teach in^ Suggestions. 
Identim surfaces in the room rrhich suggest a plat&--walls, 
tops of desks, windows, floor, sheet of paper, piece of cardboard, 
chalkboard, shadow. Make use of Saran wrap, cellophane, and a 
wire frame to show further a representation of a plane since this 
more nearly approaches the rnathematicianrs idea of a plane. Wlth 
each example bring out the idea that a plane has no boundaries, 
that it is flat, and extends Indefinitely. It is an "fdeal" of 
a situation Just as is a llne and a point. We try to give this 
Idea by suggesting things that represent a plane. It is impor-
tant to suggest repreaentations of planes in horizontal, vertical, 
and slanting posltlons. Note that if a llne contains 2 points of 
a plane, it lies in the plane and that many planes may be on a 
particular pair of points as pages of a book, revolving door, etc. 

Then using three fingers or sticks of different heights in 
sets of 3 (not in a straight line) as 
suggested by the sketch at the right, 
see what happens when a piece of card-

Mails or 
board is placed on them. Add a fourth Darning needles 
finger or a fourth stick and observe 
what happens. 
Each student may try this experi-
ment by using three fingers of one hand 
(and also three fingers using both 
hands) Letting a plane be represented 


by a book, piece of oak tag, card. Change position of fingers 
and thumb by bending the wrlst (changing sticks in model). Ask 
class to make a statement about three points not in a stralght 

line (Property 3). 

Demonstrate with wires or string the ideas in the last para-
graph before asking students to read it or suggest that one or 
two students be responsible for demonstrating the idea to other 
members of the class. 

The Class Discussion Problems may well be developed as a 


class activity. 

A note. What is a basic motivation for the study of geometrgr! 
In our dally living we are forced to deal with many flat surfaces 
and with things like flat surfaces. It would be foolish not to 
note similarities of these objects. So, we try to note them. In 
so doing we try to abstract the notion of flat surface. We try 
to find properties that allflat surfaces have. Thus, we are led 
to an abstraction of the flat surface--% geometric plane. We 
study two aspects of this--(l) What a plane is like, considered 
by itself (plane geometry), and (2) how various planes (flat 
surfaces) can be related in space (one aspect of spatial geometry). 

Just how do we study the geometric plane? We study it by 
thinking of what the plane is supposed to represent, namely, a 
flat surface, However, in trying to understand a plane (or 
planes), we find it difficult to think just abstractly. Thus, 
we think of representations of the plane--wall, chalkboard, paper, 
etc., and we think of these as representations of the abstract 
idea. The abstract idea enables us to identify characteristics 
which all flat surfaces have in common. 

Answers to Questions in Text, 4-2. Page 110. 
Yes, this is what Property 1 says. Yes, the lines must be 
on the plywood. Hold palm flat and move arm and hand in 
plane desired. Yes, new position; and no, only one way. 
Three points are in one plane; the fourth may not be in it. 
Property 2. 


Answers to Class Discussion Problems. Page 112. 

1. Depends on the pa~tlcularclassroom. 
2. There are many dafferent sloping positions, illustrating 
Property 2. 
Only 'one, illustrating Property 3. 
Answers -to Exercises -4-2. 

1. All in the same line. 
2. Not all in the same line. 
3. All legs must rest on the same plane or the devfce may 
rock. Three points not all on the same line are in 
exactly one plane. 
4. (a) Many (unlimited quantity) (b) One 
5. (a) Many (b) Many (c) Exactlyone,unlessthe 
points are all on the same line. 
6. Wing surface, flat surface used on water, Consult 
dictionary. 
*7. (a) Six, as long as no three are on the same line 

(b) Six 
8. mplanation in Section 4-5. 
4-3. Names and Symbols. 

Page z. 

1. Understandin~s. 
(a) Students learn to recognize how planes, lines on planes, 
lines through planes, etc. are represented by drawings. 
(b) Students learn to name particular points, lines, and 
planes uslng letters, etc. 
(c) Students learn how to interpret and understand perspec-
tive drawings. 
(d) Students learn to develop an awareness of planes and 
lines suggested by familiar objects. 
2. Teaching Su~p;estions, 
Bring out the idea that we make agreements as to how to 
11 11

represent certain ideas, i.e., , for a point; 

[pages 112-1131 


or for a line; and the use of letters for naming 
lines and points. Note that we usually name points by capital 
letter, lines by lower case letters or pairs of capital letters 

4+ 

wlth bar and arrows above, as, AB ,and that a plane is named 
by three capital letters or a single capital letter, Also, we 
sometimes talk about two or more lines, planes;etc., by using 
subscripts, such as, 1 y2, and Rj. 

Students should be encouraged to make such drawings on the 
chalkboard as well as on paper. 
a guessing game about abstract flgures such 
as these: man looking over fence" or _d,"boat 

-==-

enjoy a similar game with planar abstrac-
tions such as: 

"open door" or 

Fr"butcher knife. " 

Answers -to lkercises 4-3. Pa~e112. 

1. A Is to the left; B to the right 
C is nearest the top; D nearest the bottom 
2, A table 

3. It has turned upside down 
4. (a) Cot (g) Line of laundry 
(b) Ping pong table (h) Open door 
(c) Football field (I) Chair 
(d) Carpet (j) Shelf 
(4 mgh jump (k) Ladder 
(f) Coffee table 
6. Yes (or nol, We assume point V ia on line ifand 
"behind" PQ. 
No 
No 
One, P. 
7. 1, b 
2, d 
3, c 


8. (a) Yes 
(b) Yes 
(c) Yes, 1 is the only llne through 
(d) 1,is the intersection M1 and 
P 
M2 
and Q 
(4 No 
(f) No 
(g> No 

4-4. Intersection of Sets. 
Page 122. 

1. Understandin~s. 
(a) A set contains elements which are collected according 
some common property or explicit enumeration. 
(b) The common elements in two or more sets make up the 
elements of the intersection of two or more sets. 
2. Teaching Sumestions. 
Review the idea of sets by asking students to descrlbe 
certain sets, as set of names of members of the class, the set 
of members of the class, set of a11 students in class whose last 
name begins with "B", set of even numbers, set of counting numbers 
between 12 and 70 having a factor 7 (i.e. 14,21, 28, .,.). 

&plain that any 2 sets determine a set which Is called their 
Intersection, that is, the set of elements (if any) which are in 
both sets. Have students give the intersection for the set of 
odd numbers between 1 and 30 and the set of counting numbers 
having the factor 3 between 1 and 30. Note the three sets--the 
two given sets and the intersection of the two sets. Use other 
illustrations such as set of boys in the class and the set of 
students with brown eyes. Also find intersection of three sets--
students in class having blonde hair, students in class having 
birthdays in November, and students In class riding the school 
bus. In selecting sets, include some in geometry (i.e. the 
intersection of two lines in the same plane, etc. ). 

Note that the empty set is the iqtersection of two sets with 
no elements in common, Call pupils' attention to the meaning of 

[pages 119-1221 


"common" as it is used here. 
After developing the idea of Intersection go back to examples 
and describe how the idea can be expressed in symbols. It is a 
. coda we can use and like many codes it simplifies the expression. 

For example, 
Set A = (3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19, 21, 23, 25 2% 291 
Set B = {3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21, 24, 273 

A~B= 13, 9, 15, 21, 273 

You may wish to refer to the supplementary unit on "sets." 
It will provide kulther symbolism for better students and/or 
those who especially enjoy using symbols. 

Answers Exercises E.Page 123. 
1. (a) I18, 19, 20, 21, 223 

(b) As in your state 
(c) The empty set 
2. (a) 1, 3, 5 (a possible anawer) 
(b) 5, 10, 15 (a possible answer) 
(c) P, R, T (a possible answer) 
3. (a) 9, 10, 11, 12 
(b) As in your class 
(c) The point P 
(d) The line 
4, s~T= [lo, 15, 233 
I 

I 5 (a) An eQ@ 

(b) The empty aet 
6 (a) s = [Maine, N. R., ~t.,Conn., ~ss.,R. I.] 
T = [New Hampshire, New York, New Jersey, N. M. 1 

1 

! V = [Texas, New Mexlco, Arizona, ~alifornia) 

(b) New Hampshlre 
(c) The empty set 
(d) New Mexico 
7. (a) Yes 
(b) Yes. The addition of multiples of 5 gives multiples 
of 5* I 
8. Each part is almost obvious from the notions of set and 
intersection, 
[page 1231 


(a) This is by definition since the empty set is a set. 
(b) The set of those elements in X which are also in Y 
is the set of those elements in Y which are also in 
X. 
(c) Each "side" of the equality means the same set: namely, 
the set of all elements which are in each of the three 
sets X, Y, and 2. 
4-5. Intersections of Llnes and Planes. 
Page 125. 

1. Understandfnas. 
(a) Two lines may: 
(1) be in the same plane and intersect; 
(2) be In the same plane and not intersect (intersect 
in the empty set); 
(3) not be in the same plane and not intersect (lnter-
sect in the empty set), 
(b) A llne and a plane may: 
(1) not intersect (intersect in the empty set); 
(2) intersect in one point; 
(3) intersect in a line. 
(c) Two different planes may 
(1) intersect and their intersection will be a line; 
(2) not intersect (have an empty intersection). 
2. teach in^ Suggestions. 
Use models in order to explore the possible situations for 
two lines intersecting and not intersecting. (kt each student 
have materials, too.) Also, use a pencil or some other object to 
represent a lfne, and a card to represent a plane. Use two pieces 
of cardboard each cut to center with the two fitted together to 
represent the idea of two planes and their intersection, and, 
from these, state some generalizations that may be made. 

A 

[pages 123-1251 


Also, identify situations in the room which are representa-
tions of different cases of intersections of lines and planes. 
Some may wish to express the ideas In symbcls. For example, name 
the line of one of the front vertical edges 1,and line along the 
top front of desk, k. Then 1nk is a point. 

Subscripts also may be used so that we talk about lines] 
andl 2. The use of a few subscripts should be encouraged. 

Anawers & Questions in Text s.Pa~e125. 

Indefinite question -no specific answer needed. Yes it is 
true of edges of classroom, Yes; yes; yes; no. Yes; figure 
from Section 4-3 could be used. 
Page 126. Case 1. If they did, I and k would be the same line. 

x. 

A Line and 2 Plane. Yes; Figure (b) line and plane with one 
point intersection; 
Ffgure (a) line lying In plane. 

-Two Planes. No; no, cannot hold sheets to do either. 
Page 128. No other case; either the planes intersect or they 
do not. 

Answers & lkercises 4-5. Page 129. 

1. (a) Intersection of line and plane, empty set. Line 
and plane are parallel. No point, 
Intersection of line and plane, one point line 
pierces plane. 

(b) ---
(c) Interaection of line and plane more than one point. 
Line lies in plane. 
2. Intersection of floor and front wall, Intersection of 
ceiling and side wall, etc. 
C* w 

AB n AC = Point A 


4. Yes; yes; no (no point in all planes); the empty set; no. 
5 Yes; yes; one point 
6. Yes; yea; a line (the fold) 
7. (4) The empty set 
5) One point 
0 points 

HGD 
HGB 

HGB, 
HGD, 

m, 

FE, 
ED, 
ED, 

FGB, 

1 polnt 2 points 3 points 
Using Only Lettered Points 

and ABC (one other possi~t~) 
and GBC (many other possibilities) 
BOD, FGD (many other possibilities) 
FGD, BGD (some other possibilities) 

FE (many other possiblllties) 
GD (many other posalbiiities) 
AB (many othep poasibilities) 
GD, CD (many othep poasibilities) 
FGD, HGD, BClD 

4-6. Sements. 
Pa~e131. 

1. Understandings. 
(a) If A, B, and C are three points on a line, our 
intuition tells us which point is between the other two. 
(b) A line segnent is determined by any two points and Is 
on the line containing those points. 
(c) The two points which determine a segment are called 
endpoints of the segment. 
(d) A line sepent is a set of points which consists of 
Its endpoints and all points between them. 
(e) The union of two sets consists of all the elmenee of 
the two sets. 

2. teach in^ Suggestions. 
Bring out the idea that when we draw a sketch or a picture 
of a line, we draw a picture of one part of the llne, and that 
this is, properly, a line segment. However, we often represent 
a line by a part of a llne (since we cannot do anythlng else). 
One should be careful to say that the sketch represents a line 
or line see~nentas is appropriate. Draw a representation of a 
llne on the chalkboard and name two points of the line, A and 

B. Note that means points A and B and all points between 
them. Name other points on the line and various line segments. 
Review the idea of intersection of two sets. Then develop 
the idea of union of two sets using line segments much as is 
suggested by student text. mtend this idea by selecting other 
illustrations, as, set of girls in class and set of boys in class 
and that the union of the two sets is the set obtained by combfn-
lng the two sets. Each member of the union is then either a boy 
or a girl in the class. Have students suggest other sets, noting 
what can be said about the elements of the union of the two or 
more sets. Take illustrations from geometry too, such as, the 
union of two lines, line and plane, etc. Again note that if an 
element is a member of both sets, it appears only once In their 
union. 

Answers -to Exercises -4-6. Page 133. 
In text E 
1. 


>

P Q R S

-

(a) Pa, or PR, &R etc. 
(b) PQ, &R etc. 
(4 m? 
(4 m, 

2. 

A B C 

(a) The point B 
(b) 

-

(4 AC 

=

(dl 

[pages 131-1331 


6. No. 
P A B Q 

7. 

L. Yea; no. 
C. 

B. 

8. We would have more than one "straight llne" through two 
pointa. See question 6. 
9, (a) Ws follows from the idea of set. 

(b) The set of elements which are either in X or in 
Y is the same a8 the set of elements which are 
either In Y OP in X. " 
(c) Each side of the equality means the same set; 
namely, the eet of all elements which are in at 
leaat one or the same three eets X, Y, or 2. 
10. The set of elements which are either in set X or in 
set X la naturally just the set X. 
4-7. Separations. 
Page 134. 

1. Underatandin~s. 
(a) A plane separates apace Into two half-sgacea. 
(b) A llne separates a plane into two half-planes. 
(c) A polnt sepa~atesa line into two half-lines. 
(d) A ray is the union of a half-line and the point which 
determines the half-llne. 
Use cardboard models to develop underatanding of these Ideas. 
[pages 133-1341 


I 

f 

I 

: 

Note how one side of the model pictured in the materials section 
of thls Commentary aeparatea space and that we call the two sides 
half-spaces. Ask how we could separate a plane lnto two half-
planes and a line lnto two half-lines before the students have 
read these paragraphs. 

This aection gives an unusually good opportunity to emphasize 
relations among point, line, plane, and apace. You can expect 
seventh grade students particularly to enjoy thls section. It 
gives a certain structure to geometry. 

Draw 8 number of lines on the chalkboard. Mark points on 
them and talk about half-lines, rap, and endpoints. Talk about 
the intersection of 2 rays, two half-lines, and ray and half-line. 
If students are worried about whether a half-line has an endpoint, 
see explanation in student text for saying "an angle of a tri-
angle. ft 

Alao, ldentlf'y representations of half-spaces, produced by 
room dividere, walla In building; of half-planes, by lines on 
paper, lines on wall, etc.; and of half-line by naming a partlc-
ular point along the edge of a ruler. 

Answers Queationa in Text 4-7. Pa~e132. 

Beginning below the first figure of the section: 

Yes; no; not the empty set. A half-line is one of the two 
9et8 OP points into which a line is separated by a point. Yes, 
a point; yes (a set consisting of one point). No; yes; yes for 
figure. See statement (3) immediately below in text. 

Answers Brerciaes 9.Pa~e131. 

1. Yes; no; yea; no; yes. 
2. AB (or a);a half llne to the left of A,* A 0 > 
(8) +d?2 3 
(b) BA,+ +CD 
(4 W?+ +CD 
(dl BA, BC 
4 -+ 

(e) BA, CD 
4. No, no 
5. Yea, yea 
[pages 134-1371 


6. yes 
*7. Not if they are half-planes from the same line, but yes 
if you use parallel lines and overlapping half-planes. 
*8. No; yes 

4-8. Angles and Triangles,

-

Page 138. 

1. Understandinas. 
(a) An angle is a set of points consisting of 2 rays not 
both on the same straight line and having an endpoint 
in common. 
(b) An angle separates the plane containing It.
-

(c) A triangle is the union of three sets, AB, m, and 
where A, B, and C are any points not on the same 
,In,. 

p, 

A B 

(d) A triangle determines its angles but does not contain 
its angles. 
2. Teaching Suffqestions. 
Illustrate the idea of angle as two rays with the same end-
point. Use colored chalk to show interior and exterior. Also 
note how we name an angle. (This is not the only way to consider 
an angle. This definit-ion, however, Is identical with that which 
Is very likely to be used in the loth grade, Later, the measure 
of an angle and angle as a rotatlon will be considered.) 

In developing the idea of triangle, put three pofnts on 
board and note them as endpoints of 3 line segments, m, E,m. 
Note the set of' points in each segment and that a triangle is the 
union of these three sets. Use colored chalk tb show interior 
and exterior, lhphasize the set of points of the interior, the 
exterior, and that of the triangle. 

Again students may be interested in drawing angles, triangles, 
shading, etc. h his is not perspective drawing.) This Is good 
material to develop imagination and to encourage drawing,etc. 
How many triangles can be drawn with just four lines? How many 

[pages 137-138] 


wlth four lines two of which are parallel? Etc. 
In discussing the angles of the triangle bring out the idea 

: that although people often talk about angles of a triangle, It Is 
a short way of saying that they are the angles determined by the 
triangle. Use such analogies as the school determines its gradu-
ates but graduates are not In school; a city "hasttsuburbs, but 
the suburbs are not part of the clty, etc. 

Answers & Questions in Text 4-8. Page 139. 

Yes, the sides of the triangle are in the triangle; that is 
to say, every point of each side is in the set of points which 1s 
the triangle, 

No, the angles are not in the triangle. 

Answers lkercises 4-8. Pa~e-140. 

1. (a) The interior of L ABC 
(b) The Interlo+ of A ABC 
2. (a) Yes, they have different vertlces 
(b) Yes 
I 
i I 3. 
(c) 
(a) 
The lines containing the rays determine 
The pofnt A 
a plane. 
i 
1 
(b) 
(4 
No 
(dl la 
4. (a) The two points X and W 
(b) A AWX, A ABC, A BWY, A XCY 
(c) None 
(d) A, B, C, W, and Y 

(4 B, A 

Y 

R can be on ~l~l' 


(d) Not possible 
8. (a) 
Ib) 
The points = A and C 
(c) The points A and B 
(d) The point B 
(e) 
(f) 
L ACB = I 
(g) 

(h) The union of and 
+g. No; yes. 
+lo. (a) Yes 

(b) It may or may not, depending on choice of P and Q. 
(c) Yes 
< 

(dl No 0. 

4-9, One-to -one Correspondence. 
Page 142. 

Understandings. 

(a) The idea of one-to-one correspondence is fundamental in 
counting. (chapter 3) 
(b) One-to-one correspondences in geometry can be establi&ed: 
(1) Between a certain set of lines and a certain set 
of points 
(2) Between the set of points of one sepent and the 
set of points of another segment 
(3) Between certain other geometric sets in pairs. 
[pages 140-1421 

95 

2. Teaching Sw~estions, 
Review the idea of one-to-one correspondence and the neces-
sary condition that for each element In set A there corresponds 

1 

an element in set B. For example, if there are 5 chalrs and 
5 people, for each chair there is a person and for each p=?son 
there Is a chair. 

I 
I 
This idea, while elementary, Is sometimes hard to grasp. 
One-to-one correspondences between finite sets (sets having a 
specific number of elements as in the illustration above) are 
easy to observe If they exlst. If sets A and B are finite, 
then if A and B have the same number of elements, there exlsts 
a one-to-one correspondence between them. Such follows simply by 
counting. But we are sometimes interested in a particular one 
of the possible one-to-one correspondences. 'For the two congruent 
triangles below we are interested In matching A with D, B 

congruence. If we were to match A with F, B with D, and 
C with E we would not be noting the congruence. 
For infinite sets H and K we may be interested in two 
aspects: 

(1) Is there any one-to-one correspondence between H and K? 
(2) Is there a "nice1'or llnatural"one-to-one correspondence? 
In the examples In Section 4-9, we not only show that there 
is some one-to-one correspondence but that there is a "natural" or 
Hnice" one. There also would be a great many that are not "naturd" 
or "nice." 

To establish a one-to-one correspondence we need (1) a 
complete matching scheme, and (2) in this particular device It 
myst be true that for any element of either aet there corresponds 
a unique element of the other set. It is implied by what we say 
that if -a corresponds to 2, then -b corresponds to -a. 


In effect, to establish a one-to-one correspondence we must 
have a way of II tying" each element of either set to a particular 
element of the other. And the "atring" we use for tying -a to 

-b also ties 2 to -a. 
In the text we describe a one-to-one correspondence between 
a certain set of lines and a certain set of Points. 
Problems 2 and 3 (Ikepclse 4-9-b) are developmental and 
becauae of this are suggested for possible classwork. 

Answers -to Questions in Text 4-9. Page 142. 
Yes (1f all ticket-holders show up). Same number. 
Yes. No. 
One more person than chairs. Yes, at the end of the game, 
No. a g

rPSPi f 

I I1 111 IV v 

Answers & Exercises 4-9a. Page 143. 

1. Depends on the number of pupils and the number of desks. 
2. No. There are more states than there are cities of 
over 1,000,000 in population. 
3. Yes. For each person there Is a nose and for each 
nose there corresponds a person; hence, counting noses 
gives the total number of persons involved. 
each odd la matched to the next 

0 2 . . . lower even. 
5. Yes. Match elements of R with elements of T by 
means of elements in S. 
6 Each whole number is matched with the whole number 
which is two times as large. Thus: 

Answers to Class lkercises. Page 144. 

4. (a) No. 
(b) Yes. Property 1. (section 4-1) 
[pages 142-1441 


(a) Yes. 
(b) 3. 

(c) Yes. 
(d) Yes. 
(e) Yes. 
Yes. 
(a) Yes. 
(b) One. 
line; point; point; line. 
-to Exercises 4-gb. Page 145. 
Each vertex to the side opposite. Yes. 
Yes, you should observe it. 
Yes; yes. 
3. Yes; yes; yes; yes; yes. 
"4. There are rays in space similar to the set of rays 
described in Problem 2. 
"5. The set of intersections of' the elements of K with 
a plane form the set H. 
*6. (a) Yes 
(b) Yes 
(c) Yes, see Problem 5 (Exercises 4-ga). 

4-10. Simple Closed Cwes. 

Page 147. 

1. Understandings. 
(a) Broken-line figures such as those we see in statistical 
graphs, triangles, rectangles, as well as circles, and 
[pages 144-1471 


figure eights are curvee. 

(b) A slmple closed curve in the plane separates the plane 
into 2 sets--the points 'ofthe interior of the curve 
and the points of the exterior of the curve. The curve 
itself Is contained in neither set. 
(c) The curve Is called the boundary of the interior (or the 
exterior). 
(d) If a point A is in the Interior of a curve and a point 
B Is in the exterior of the curve, then the lntersectlcn 
of and the curve contains at least one element. 
2. Teaching Suggestions. 
Draw some curves on the chalkboard, bringing out the idea 
that we call them "curves" and that a segment is just one kind 
of curve. We use the word "curve" in a special way in mathe-
matics. 

Note that a slmple closed curve separstes a plane Into two 
aets and that the curve itself Is the boundary of the two aets. 
Also, that any quadrilateral, parallelogram or rectangle is a 
simple closed curve. Identify some of the many curves which are 
suggested in the room, such as boundary of chalkboard, total 
boundary of floor surface, etc. 

Students enjoy drawing elaborate curvea which may still be 
classified as slmple closed curves. Encourage their drawing a 
few simple closed curves for a bulletin board exhibit. 

Answers -to merciaea 4-10. Page 149. 

2. The intersection of the exterior of J1 and the interior 
[pages 147-1491 


This is ruled 

out because of 

the extra point 

Yes, 3. 

4. No, It contains two. 
5. Slmple closed curve, line, angle 
6. (a) B and D 
+ 3 

(c) BA and DE 
-

9. Because the curve would have to cross an even number of 
times. If the curve crosses three times, the pencil is 
then not on the aame side of the line as where it started. 
Sample Questlona on Chapter 4 

The sets of questions presented at the end of the chapter In 
the Teachers Commentary are NOT intended as a Chapter test. 
Teachers should construct chapter test carefully by combining 
selected items from the set of questions included in the guide 
and questions of their own writing. Great care should be used to 


.d making the test too long. 

1. If two different planes each contain the same three
-

points what can you say about the three points? h he 

points are on a line.) 

2. Draw L ABC. Label P a point in the Interior. Shade 
-

the P-side of line AB. 

3. Draw two simple closed curves whose intersection is a 
set of exactly four points. 
4. Draw a simple closed curve which 1s the union of five 
sements, no two on the same line. 
0 

5. Draw A PQR. Label a point A between P and Q. 
Draw the line m. Llst all trl-
angles represented In your figure. 
IA pa, A PAR, nRAQ.1 
P 

6. Each point of a line separates the line Into iwo half-
lines. Make two simllar statements, one about a line 
and a plane and the other about a plane and space. 
(A line separates a plane into two half-planes. A plane 
separates space into two half-spaces.) 
7. Suppose the intersection of two lines is the empty set. 
If they are in the same plane they are 1 parallel ). 
If they are not in the same plane they are { skew ). 
8. Consider the f.lgure at the right. 
(a) List 3 rays represented.
3, 2,3)

3 

(b) What IS AC n aABC? (X) 
(c) mat IS wniiif? 
(point A) 


101 

9. Draw a horizontal line. Label four points on it P, Q, 
R, and S in that order from left to right. 
P Q RS 

(a) Name two sepents whoae intersection is one point. 
and 
(b) Name two rays whose unlon 18 the line. ( and 8) 
Name two segnents whose intersection is a segment.
(c) 
( ad a) 
(d) Name two se@nentswhoae union la a segnent. 
(Xand 
10. Using the planes of the walls and ceiling of youp room, 
list three planes whoae intersection is exactly one 
point. (Front wall, side wall, and ceiling. ) 
11. Label A, 8, and C three points not 
all on the aame line. Draw s,%8,
4-b 

and x. 

4Jjfg

7A6B 

(a) Into how many pieces (regions) does the union of 
the aewents , , and aeparate the plane? 
(2 

(b) Into how many piecaa (regions) does the union of 
lines %?, and sepraate the plane? (7) 
12. Draw a vertical line R on your paper. Lsbel points 
A, 3, C, and D in that order from top to bottom, 
(a) what IS KE nED? (E) A 
(b) What is Z n 3?(me mpty set 
. B 

(o) What is the unlon of '11B and z? 
(3 
(3 
-.C 

(d) What is the union of AXIi and 'BE? 0 
(m) 4 

13. In the figure, a set of rays 
from P may be used to establish 
P 

a (one-to-one correspondence) 
between AC' and ED. 


To the left of an item in the left-hand column place 
the letter of a corresponding Item from the right-hand 
column: 

+ + 

(9) 1. the,unlon of PA and -8 a. AP 
(f) 2. J,n-4 b. AEi 
(c) 3. segment c. A&~D 
(3) 4. point in interior of L APB d. Q 
(4 5. w e. 4 

(a) 6. ray onya f. P 
(b) 7. the union of a and a g. LAPB 
(i) 8. h. empty set 
(h) 9. an4 I.B 
(j) 10. the union of4 and J. 4 
In the corresponding blank to the left of each of the 
following statements Indicate if it is true or false. 

r rue) 1. Point Q is on the C-side of s. 
(False) 2. is the intersection of two half-planes. 
(~alse) 3. The union of and 3 LABC. 
(~alae) 4. Point B separates 3lint two segments 

and m. 


103 

(True) 5 Point B separates into two half-lines. 
r rue) 6. Paint Q Is in the interior of angle ACE. 
(False) 7. Point Q is In the interior of angle DBA. 

r rue) 8. The interlor of angle ABC is the intersection 
of a half-plane containing C and a half-plane 
containing A. 

(True) 9. Triangle ABC is a simple closed curve, 
(True) 10. A one-to-one correspondence may be established 
between (a) the set of lines intersecting 

e 

AC and contafning B and (b) the set of 

C) 

polnts on AC. 

Multiple Choice. 

(a) intersect in the empty set 
(b) are parallel 
(c) intersect in one point 
(d) are in the same plane (a) 
2. Segment &P: 
(a) lies in plane M1 
(b) is in plane % 
(c) connects an element of MI with an 
element of' M2 
(d) none of these 

3 (a] j2separates M1 into two half-planes 

(b) / fl~~
is the empty set 

(c) /2n~1is the empty set 
(d) 4 separates space 30 
4. (a) ~,nl,= P 
(c) % does not extend endlessly as does1 
(d) % contains all the points 4& 
5. Point P: 
(a) is in the intersection of M1 and M;? 
(b) 
lies in a half-plane whose boundary isRp 

(c) is not an element of s. 
(d) 18 not an element of/ 5A 
