Chapter 1 

WHAT IS MATHEMATICS? 

General Remarks 
This chapter is intended to give the pupil an appreciation for 
the Importance of rnathematlcs. Its objectives are: 

I. To develop an understanding of what mathematics is as 
opposed to simple computation. 
11. To develop an appreciation of the role of mathematics 
in our culture. 
111. To motivate pupils by pointing out the need for mathe 
maticlans and for mathematically trained people. 
Since this chapter is much different from ordinary textbook 
material it will need a different treatment. The purpose of the 
chapter is -not to teach many facts or skills, but rather to build 
an enthusiasm for the study of mathematics. Good attctudes will 
be built if you use imagination and enthusiasm in getting these 
objectives across to the puplls. Since the material Is not to be

-

taught for mastery, we strongly recommend that no test be given

-

covering the contents of this chapter, 

Experience shows that this chapter can be covered within six 
to eight lessons. Certaknly no more than eight days should be 
devoted to it. 

Were seventh graders are in a new school situation and have 
so many interruptions during the first few days, some teachers may 
wfsh to precede this chapter with review exercises which are more 
familiar to the pupils. 

Note that Exercises 1-6, (Page 13) and Exercises 1-7, fa age 14) 
are suggestions for background study to be carried on throughout 
the year. These should be begun during the first week, with 
periodic reports on progress by pupils. Where guldance personnel 
are available, their services should be solicited to help the 
class outline a plan of action for the year. 


It might be worthwhile to have the pupils read this chapter 
again at the end of the year. The problems might also be solved 
again. They should be much eaaier to aolve after the courae has 
been completed. 

Encourage the more able student8 to solve the brainbuaters 
but be ready to help them if they have difficulties. Most pupils 
will want to puzzle over the brainbusters for a few days. For 
thie reason, only Individual help Is suggested until the time 
seems appropriate for general class diacusslon. 

1-1. Mathematics ---

as a Method of Reasoning, 
Page &. It might provide additional challenge to emphasize to the 
pupila that Exercises 1-1 and Exercises 1-2 are not easy. More-
over, no slmple formula for solution can be given. Some of the 
pupils (and many parental) will certainly find the problems diffi-
cult and time-consuming at this stage. You may not wish to 
assign all the problems in these two sectlone. 

Answers to Exe~cises1-1--Page 2: 

1. THOsons cross; one returns. Father crosses; other son 
returns. Two sons cross. 
2, No. They need a boat carrying 225 pounds. Solution as 
in 1 above, 

3. Man takea goose and returns alone. He takes fox and 
returns with goose. He takea corn across river and 
returns alone to pick up goose. 
4, Yes, Thfs depends on the fact that 8x + 5y = 2 has 
solutions in integers, such as x = -1, y = 2 and x = 4, 
y = -6. The first means that if you fill the 5-gallon 
jug twice and empty it once Into the 8-gallon jug, you 
will have 2 gallons left. The second solution means 
that if you fill the 8-gallon jug four times and use it 
to fill the 5-gallon jug 6 times, you will have 2 gallons 
left, Point out that the first solution is best. 

[pages 1-21 


I 3 

-5. Most pupils will need paper and pencil for this one, As 
they attempt the solution in front of the class it is a 
good idea to minimize the help from others in the class. 
If an error 18 made, another student should be selected to 

1 present hia solution. It should be pointed out that a 
i croaafng neceasltatss a landing. 

I Ml M2 M3.C1C2 C3 

t 

t 

5 CI cross river; returns. 
C C croaa river; C1 returns. 

2 3 
M1 Me cross river; M1 C2 return. 
M1 M3 cross river; C3 returns. 
C1 C2 cross river; C1 returns. 
C1 C3 cross river. 

Balance the two groups of 3 marbles each. If they balance 
then it is only necessary to balance the remaining two 
marbles to find the heavy one. If the two groups of 3 
marbles do not balance, take the heavier group. Of the 3 
marbles in the heavier group balance any 2 marbles. If 
they balance, the remaining marble is the heaviest one. 
If the 2 marbles do not balance, the heaviest will be 1 
of the 2 on the balmce. 

7, In aolving the problem is it practical to try out all the 
possible waye the dominoes may be placed on the board? 
This would be difficult because there are more than 
65,536 ways to cover the whole board, The solution may 
be found in another way: 
How many squares are there altogether on the board? 

(64) 

How many squares muet be covered? (62) 

What is special about the two square8 next to each 

other? (They sre of different colors. ) 

What Is speclal about the two opposite corners? 

co hey are the same color. ) 


If you place any number of domlnoes on the board can you 
say anythlng about the kinds of squares which will be 
covered? How doea this compare with the kinds of squares 
which you are supposed to cover? Do you have to make 
even one experiment in order to get the answer to the 
origlnal problem? Can two squares of the same color be 
covered with one domino? The answer to thla question 
ahould help some of the students reason why the solution 
Is impoaalble. 

1-2. Deductive Reasonlnq. 
Pam 3. After the concept of deductive reasoning has been Intro-
duced, it ia still necessary to give the students an understanding 
of Its importance. Examplea of scientific advances in which de-
ductive reaaoning was used might be Elnstelnts discovery of the 
atomic energg formula E = MC2 , apace travel, satellites, digital 
computer development, nuclear energg, etc. 

Anawers to Exercises 1-2 -Page 4: 

I. After each person receivea one pencll, the 5th pencil 
must go to one of the 4 people. 
2. (a) Yes. 
(b) Someone gets at least 3 pencils. 
3. 367. h he answer mat take leap year into account.) 
4. 1. Tell the class that the first two to enroll might be 
twins. 
7. Only 1. 
8. 6 committees, 
9. 12 committees. 

[pages 3-45 


1-From Arithmetic -to Mathematlcs. 

Page 5. Before considering Gauss's discovery of summing an arith-
metlc series, you may wish to offer the following as an example of 
a scientific experiment in which mathematics is used. 

Make a pendulum by fastening a 
weight to a string 40 inches long. psiling 
Attach the string to an object that eye hook 
will not move, The pendulum ehould 
swing freely. Set the pendulum 
into motion. Count the number of 
times it swings back and forth in 
30 seconds. Shorten the string by 
5 inches and repeat this experiment. f 
Shorten again by 5 inches and do it 
again. Make a table of your ob-
0 
i,--

Length of string No. of gwings 
In knchee in 30 seconds 

Does there aeem to be a relationshfp between the length of 
the pendulum and the time? Can you predict the number of swings 
in 30 seconds If the string is 20 inches long? How does the 
number of swings depend upon the length of the atring? 

You have actually repeated an experiment done by Galileo 
about 400 years ago. Galileo was a famous Italian scientist who 
lived in the years 1564-1642. He got the idea for the experiment 
by watching a hanging light fixture swing back and forth, He 
timed the swing by means of his pulse beat. He was one of the 
first aclentists to show how important it was to Investigate 
problems by the experimental method. 


In mathematics we often use the inductive method to discover 
something. Then we use deductive reasoning to prove that it is 
true. 

John Freedrich Karl Gauss was born in Brunawick, Germany, in 
1777. He died in 1855 at the age of 78. The pupils may be inter-
ested in noting that his lifetime almost spanned the years from the 
American Revolution to the Civil War. 

Many mathematicians consider Gauss as one of the three great-
eat mathematicians of all times, the other two being Newton and 
Archimedes. 

In this age of space exploration'lt is interesting to note 
that Gauss developed powerful methods of calculating orbits of 
comets and planets. His interests extended also to such fields 
as magnetism, gravitation, and mapping. In 1833 Gauss invented 
the electric telegraph, which he and his fellow worker, Wilhelm 
Weber, used as a matter of course in sending messages. 

In 1807 Gauss was appointed Director of the Gdttingen 
Observatory and Lecturer of Mathematics at G8ttingen University. 
In later years the greatest honor that a German mathematician 
could have was to be appointed to the professorahip which Gauss 
had once held. 

Thla sectlon deals with Gauss's discovery of the known method 
of sming an arithmetic series. It dramatizes how some pupils 
(and mathematicians) apply insight to finding a aolution to a 
problem. Your better students should be told that there are 
methods other than Gauaals for finding the sum of a seriee of 
numbers. Some students might be encouraged to discover methods 
of their om for addfng number series quickly. 

The "middle number" method is one that may be used. This 
scheme can be used for an even or an odd number of integers. The 
following examples may be used to explain this method athe 
students who have tried to discover other methods. 


In this series the middle number (4) is the average of t.he 
individual numbers of the series. The sum is the product of the 
middle umber (4)and the nu~nberof integers in the series or 
4 x 7 = 25. 

Some pupils may prefer to think of the series as 
(1 + 7)+ (2 + 6)+ (3 + 5) + 4 = (4 + 4) c (k + 4) + (4 + 4) 
+4=7~4=28. 

ExampleE. 1 +> =?

t 3 + 4 + 5+ 6+7 -1-8 

In this case the "middle number" is halfway between h and 5, 
1 1 

or . Then the product (%) x 8 = 36 is seen to give the correct 

L 

Sum. 
It may seem more plausible here to write the sum as 
(1+ 8)+ (2 + 7) + (3 + 6) + (4+ 5) = 

Clearly, Gauss's method is to be preferred in this case. 

Answers to Exercises 1-3--page 6: 

1. Another method is this: 2 + 4 = 2 + 3, 1+ 5 = 3 + 3. 
That is, the sum is the same as: 
3+3+3+3+3=5~3=15. 
This can be callcd the "averaging method." 
2. Either method works. Gauss method: 8x5. 
I?--

' 
Averaging method: 5 x 4 = 20. 

16 x 8

3. = 6k. Here there is an even number of quantities 
so that the "averaging method" must be 
modified to give 8 ei&tfs or 8x 8 = 64. 
11. (a) 1!. 

(b) 9-

() 16. 

(d) The sum of the first 'In"consecutive odd numbers 
~qualsthe square of "nu. 
(e) 64. 


8. Yes, provided that the numbefs are In arithmetic progrea-
aion; that is, there 18 the same difference between each 
pair of adjacent numbers, 
9, Yes. If we start with 1 there are 200 Integers in the 

series giving us v.If we start with 0 there 

are 201 integers in the series giving us w. 

The products of like factors are equal. The method also 
may be used in a aerlee if we select a number other than 
1 or 0 as a starting point. Some of the better atudenta 
may investigate whether the method works in other number 
series, 

10. (a) If you add 1 to the quantity, the sum up to any 
number is equal to the next number. Hence, the 
sum plus 1 is equal to 2 
256 s 512. Therefore, 
the sum is 511. 
(b) This is more In the spirit of Gauss: 
Sum = I + 2 + 4 + ... + 256 
-

2 x sum = 2 + 4 + ...+ 256 + 512 
Subtracting: Sum = 511. 

11. Sum = 2 + (6+ 18 + .., + 486) 
3 x sum = 6 + 18 + ... + 486 + 1458 
Subtracting: 2 x (the sum) = 1458 -2 = 1456 
Sum, 728. 
1-4. Kind8 of Mathematics. 

Page 7. DiBcussion of this section should emphasize the dynamic 

character of mathematics. It is not a "dead" subject as many 

parents believe, 


It is important also to point out here (and throughout the 
course) that certain important ingredients are commoli to all the 
many varieties of mathematics. The method of logical reasoning, 
the use and manipulation of abstract symbols, the insistence on 
precision of thought and clarity of expression, the emphasls on 
genera: results--these are some characteristics which need to be 
stressed whenever possible. 

Probability--page 9: 

This section gives only a very brief introduction to proba-
bility. Although students may become interested at this point and 
attempt more complex problems, it would bo bctter if they waited. 
A chapter on probability is included in Vol~un~ Some supple-

11. 
mentary units also are available. 

Answers to Exercises 1-&--page 9: 

-r--

2. One out of four or 
1

3. One out of two or 7. 
I

'I. One out of 52 or q. 
-4 1

5. Four out of 52 or 52 -3. 
The probability may be thought of as a ratio of 

the number of possible tions

favorable sel~c

-

5e total number of all pwectlons. 

The pupils should be reminded that to say his chances are 
1 out of 13 does not mean that he will necessarily draw 
an ace in the first 13 draws. 

6. One out of six. A die has 6 sides and only one side has 
two dots. 
7. There are four possibilities In all, only one of whlch 
1
is favorable. Hence the probability is T. 

8. One out of ?,6. The more advanced students should reason 
that there are 36 possible combinations. A table may be 
constructed to show the possibilities. A possible diagram 
is the following. 
[pages 8-9 1 


Number of 
Possibilities 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 ... 34 36

35 

1st die 111111222...6 6 6 

2nd die 123456123....4 5 6 
Since there i6 only one possible way of making two ones 
1

the probability is 56. 

9. The possibilities are easily enumerated. 
Number of 
Possibilities 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
1st coln HHHHTTTT 
2nd coin HHTTHHTT 
3rd coin HTHTHTHT 
1

For 3 heads to come up, the probability la 8. For 
3

exactly 2 heads the probability is 3 out of 8 org. For 
at least two heads the chance is 4 out of 8 or -.1 Note 

C 

that thla equals the probability of exactly two heads 6)
1

plus the probability of 3 heads (B). 

Class Activities 1-6 and 1-?--paps 13-14: 

The exercises suggested in Section 1-6 and Section 1-7 should 
be undertaken as year-long projects to be reported on periodically. 
Much of this information would be good bulletin-board materisl. 
A general aim is to make the pupils alert to the current news 
relating to mathematics and mathematicians. As the year progresses 
they should gain an increasing appreciation of the important role 
mathematical thought is playing in our present civilization. 

The National Science ~oundation,Washington 25, D.C., pub-
lishes pamphlets which contain fnformatlon on the number of 
mathematicians and where they are employed, 

[pages 13-14I 


! 

11 

A survey of college requirements in the vocations students 
may choose should be especially valuable at this stage. We hope 
it may eaee the difficult task of effective guidance in choosing 
their high school courses. 

One word of caution is perhaps warranted here. The purpose 
of these sections on mathematics today 1s to call attention to its 
central role in the pupil's daily life. The necessity for a mini-
mum howledge of mathematics is to be stressed. ---A 

It is not the 
intention -to recruit people -for careers -as rnathernatlcians.-

1-8. Mathematics -for Recreation. 
Page 15, Brlng out the fascination of mathematics as a leisure 
actlvity or hobby. ncourage students in finding recreational 
mathematics from the booka available at school md from current 
magazines or rotogravure aection~of newspapers. 

I 
I 
Choose auch problems now and then, throughout the year, at a 
time when the class needs a change of pace. These kinds of 
problems can be used profitably with the class period before aI lengthy vacation. 

Dlseuasion of Kijnigsberg Bridges Problem.

j -

By experimenting you can show that it is impossible to pass 
i just once over every bridge if there are more than two points 

i 

I where an odd number of routes come together. Since there are 

t 

I 

., -this

, Pour points where an odd number of route8 come together, 

I make8 it impoesible to walk over each bridge once and only once. 
You may wish to consult the supplementary unit on the KGnigsberg 
Bridges for further ideas. 

Answer -to Exercise -1-8--page--16: 

1 The first figure can be drawn if you start at either of 
the vertices where an odd number of segments come to-
gether. The second figure has no such vertices so it 
can be drawn by starting at any vertex. The third figure 
has four vertices where an odd number of segments come 
together ao it cannot be drawn without lifting your 

pencil or retracing a line. 
[pages 15-16] 


1-9, Highlights of First-Year Junior High School Mathematics. 
Page 16, This section is intended to give the student a general 
overview of the scope of the first-year course in junior high 
school mathematics. It is intended to broaden his ideas of mathe-
matics by discussing very briefly the topics that will be studied. 
This, together with the introduction of logical reasoning and 
probability earlier in this chapter, will help dispel the general 
idea that mathematics is computation only. 

Reading this chapter again later in the year may strengthen 
the student's understanding of what mathematics is, 

