
4.1.1 Phases of the Moon 
Develop and use a model of the Sun-Earth-Moon system to describe the cyclic patterns 
of lunar phases, eclipses of the Sun and Moon, and seasons. Examples of models could 
be physical, graphical, or conceptual. 
In this section focus on observable patterns created by the positions 
of the Earth, Moon, and Sun throughout the month. The Earth-Moon- 
Sun System also creates observable patterns throughout the year. It 
is important to analyze this system in order to describe how it creates 
repeating, or cyclic, patterns, 
Phases of the Moon 
As the moon orbits around Earth, different parts of it appear to be illuminated by the Sun. 
The Moon does not produce any light of its own. It only reflects light from the Sun. The 
Moon sometimes appears fully illuminated and sometimes appears completely dark. 
Although it changes in appearance, the Moon is always half illuminated by the Sun. From 
our perspective on Earth, we see all, a portion, or none of the illuminated part of the Moon. 
These predictable patterns in the appearance of the Moon are referred to as phases of 
the Moon. 
. Visit this interactive for more information about the phases of the moon: 
http://bit.ly/2dPQlKZ 

www.ck12.org 
14 
A full moon occurs when the Moon appears to be fully illuminated from our perspective 
on Earth. This happens when Earth is between the Moon and the Sun. As the Moon 
continues orbiting around Earth, the illuminated part that is visible from Earth decreases 
until the Moon appears to be completely dark. This phase is referred to as a new moon. 
As the cycle continues, the illuminated part of the Moon will appear to increase until it is 
fully illuminated again. This predictable pattern takes about 28 days. 
. Watch this video to see the phases change: http://go.nasa.gov/2dZEFVb 
The illumination of the Moon increases to a full moon and decreases to a new moon. This predictable 
pattern occurs about every 28 days. 
Focus Questions 
1. What causes the appearance of the Moon to change in a predictable? 
2. Where are the Sun, Earth, Moon positioned for full and new moons to occur? 
3. How does the Moon receive its light? 

www.ck12.org 
23 
Seasons 
Visit this interactive to explore the causes of Earth’s seasons. 
. http://tinyurl.com/j9nqnnw 
The days are getting warmer. Flowers begin to bloom. The sun appears higher in the sky, 
and daylight lasts longer. Spring seems like a fresh, new beginning. What causes these 
welcome changes? 
Some people think that Earth is closer to the Sun in the summer and farther away from 
the Sun in the winter, but that’s not true! Why can’t that be true? Because when it’s 
summer in one hemisphere, it’s winter in the other. 
The Earth revolves in an orbit, or the path a planet takes around an object. Initially 
believed to have a circular orbit, the Earth’s orbit is actually elliptical. As Earth moves 
throughout the year to new positions around the sun, the movement results in our four 
seasons: summer, autumn, winter, and spring. 
The distance from the sun doesn’t have much effect on the heating and cooling of Earth. 
In fact, the Northern Hemisphere is closest to the Sun during winter. So, why do we, in 
the Northern Hemisphere, feel coldest when we are closest to the Sun? 
Earth’s axis of rotation, or imaginary poles on which Earth spins, is tilted at a 23.5 degree 
angle. Because of this tilt, one of the hemispheres is angled toward the Sun. This causes 
that hemisphere to receive more direct energy from the Sun. 
As Earth revolves around the 
Sun, the axis of rotation 
maintains its tilt. The axis 
always points in the same 
direction, which is toward the 
North Star (Polaris). The 
combination of the Earth’s 
revolution around the Sun and 
Earth’s 23.5 degree angle tilt 
are the reasons we have 
seasons. 

www.ck12.org 
54 