
4.3.1 Water Cycle 
Develop a model to describe how the cycling of water through Earth’s systems is driven 
by energy from the Sun, gravitational forces, and density. 
In this section, focus on energy. Think about how the transfer of energy 
drives the motion and cycling of water throughout the water cycle. 
The Water Cycle 
The water molecule found in your glass of water today could have erupted from a volcano 
early in Earth's history. In the intervening billions of years, the molecule probably spent 
time in a glacier or far below the ground. The molecule surely was high up in the 
atmosphere and maybe deep in the belly of a dinosaur. Because of the unique properties 
of water, water molecules can cycle through almost anywhere on Earth. Where will that 
water molecule go next? 
Water continuously moves between living organisms, such as plants, and non-living 
things, such as clouds, rivers, and oceans. The water cycle does not have a starting or 
ending point. It is an endless recycling process that involves oceans, lakes and other 
bodies of water, as well as the land surfaces and the atmosphere. One possible pathway 
water could follow is: 
. Water evaporates from the surface of the ocean. As the water vapor rises, it 
collects and is stored in clouds. 
. As water cools in the atmosphere it condenses to form clouds. Condensation is 
when water vapor turns into liquid water. 
. Water leaves the atmosphere as precipitation. Precipitation includes rain, snow, 
hail, and sleet. Precipitation returns the water to the Earth’s surface. 
. When precipitation falls to the surface, the water can sink into the ground to 
become part of the underground water reservoir, also known as groundwater. 
Much of this underground water is stored in aquifers, which are porous layers of 
rock that can hold water. 
Most precipitation that occurs over land is not absorbed by the soil. This water remains 
on the surface and is called runoff. Runoff collects in streams and rivers and eventually 
flows back into the ocean. 
Water also moves through the living organisms. Plants soak up large amounts of water 
through their roots. The water then moves up the plant and evaporates from the leaves 
in a process called transpiration. Another name for transpiration is evapotranspiration. 
The process of transpiration, like evaporation, returns water back into the atmosphere. 

www.ck12.org 
76 
Forces that Drive the Water Cycle 
Solar Energy 
The Sun provides the energy that drives the water cycle. For water to evaporate it requires 
an input of energy. The Sun directly impacts the water cycle by supplying the energy 
needed for evaporation. 
Density 
As clouds accumulate more water they become more dense. Water will fall from the 
clouds as precipitation to the surface of the Earth. 
Gravity 
Clouds will move water from the ocean to the tops of the mountains. Water evaporated 
from the ocean will be deposited on land as precipitation. Gravity pulls the water down 
to the oceans where the process continues. 
Earth’s Water Reservoirs 
Water can be found in many different locations on the Earth. It can be found in oceans, 
clouds, puddles or living things. Each of these locations is called a reservoir. 

www.ck12.org 
77 
Oceans 
Most of Earth’s water is stored in the oceans. In fact, 97% of the Earth’s water is in this 
reservoir. Water can remain in the ocean for hundreds or thousands of years. Or it can 
evaporate in days or hours. 
Atmosphere 
When water absorbs energy it will change from a liquid to water vapor. The Sun’s energy 
can evaporate water from the ocean surface or from lakes, streams, or puddles on land. 
The water vapor remains in the atmosphere until it condenses to become tiny droplets of 
liquid. The droplets gather in clouds, which are blown about the globe by wind. As the 
water droplets in the clouds collide and grow, they fall from the sky as precipitation. 
Precipitation can be rain, sleet, hail, or snow. Sometimes precipitation falls back into the 
ocean and sometimes it falls onto the land surface. 
Streams and Lakes 
When water falls from the sky as rain it may enter streams and rivers that flow downward 
to lakes and oceans. Water that falls as snow may sit on a mountain for several months. 
Snow may become ice in a glacier, where it will remain for hundreds or thousands of 
years. Snow and ice slowly melt over time to become liquid water, which provides a 
steady flow of fresh water to streams, rivers, and lakes. A water droplet falling as rain 
could also become part of a stream or a lake. At the surface, the water will eventually 
evaporate and reenter the atmosphere. 
Soil 
A significant amount of water seeps into the ground. Soil moisture is an important 
reservoir for water (Figure below). Water trapped in soil is important for plants to grow. 
The moisture content of soil in the United States varies greatly. (From ck12) 

www.ck12.org 
78 
Groundwater 
Water may seep through dirt and rock below the soil and then through pores infiltrating 
the ground to go into Earth’s groundwater system. Groundwater enters aquifers that may 
store fresh water for centuries. Alternatively, the water may come to the surface through 
springs or find its way back to the oceans. Water can remain in this reservoir for hundreds 
or even thousands of years. 
Biosphere 
Plants and animals depend on water to live. Plants and animals are another place water 
is stored. Plants take up water from the soil and release large amounts of water vapor 
into the air through their leaves in transpiration. Water will move quickly through this 
reservoir. 
Focus Questions: 
1. Explain how energy from the Sun affects the movement of water through the 
water cycle. 
2. What is a water reservoir? List 3 examples of water reservoirs. 
3. Describe how water can change states as it moves through the water cycle? 


Utah Science with Engineering Education Standards 


