
4.2.1 Atoms and Molecules 
Develop models to show that molecules are made of different kinds, proportions and 
quantities of atoms. Emphasize understanding that there are differences between atoms 
and molecules, and that certain combinations of atoms form specific molecules. 
Examples of simple molecules could include water (H2O), atmospheric oxygen (O2), and 
carbon dioxide (CO2). 
In this section focus on proportions and quantities. There are differences 
between atoms and molecules. It is important to develop models that show 
how different proportions and quantities of atoms form different molecules. 
Atoms and Molecules 
Everything you can see, touch, smell, feel, and taste is made of atoms. Atoms are the 
basic building-block of all matter (including you and me, and everyone else you'll ever 
meet), if we want to know about what something is made of, then we have to know a few 
things about these incredibly small particles. 
Smallest Building Blocks 
Everyday experiences should convince you that matter is found in many forms, yet all 
matter you have ever seen is made of atoms. Atoms are the smallest unit of matter. These 
atoms combine to form molecules, which can be made up of the same or different types 
of atoms. Molecules are formed when two or more atoms link up. For instance, a molecule 
of oxygen that we breathe is made of two atoms of oxygen (O2). A molecule of water is 
made of two atoms of hydrogen (H2) and one atom of oxygen (O). All water molecules 
have the same ratio: two hydrogen to one oxygen (H2O). The figure on the right shows a 
water molecule that has two hydrogen atoms (shown in gray) bonded to one oxygen atom 
(shown in red). 
To help develop your model of of atoms and molecules, think of interlocking building 
blocks. Each block is individual with its own color, shape, and size like an atom. You can 
combine these blocks together to form a simple structure like a molecule. 

www.ck12.org 
55 
Two things are important to know about molecules: 
. A molecule always has the same type of atoms in the same proportions. For 
example, carbon dioxide always has two atoms of oxygen for each atom of carbon, 
and water always has two atoms of hydrogen for each atom of oxygen. 
. A pure substance always has the same composition throughout. For example, all 
the water in the ocean has the same type and proportion of atoms. 
Properties of Molecules 
The properties of a molecule are different from the properties of the atoms that form them. 
That’s because atoms in a molecule combine and become an entirely different substance 
with its own unique properties. Do you put salt on your food? Table salt is the molecule 
sodium chloride. A molecule of table salt, contains an atom of sodium and an atom of 
chlorine. As shown in the figure below, sodium is a solid that reacts explosively with water, 
and chlorine is a poisonous gas. But together in table salt, sodium and chlorine form a 
harmless unreactive compound that you can safely eat. 
Focus Questions 
1. How would a model of an atom and molecule be different? 
2. How would you model a carbon dioxide molecule that has one atom of carbon 
and two atoms of oxygen (CO2)? 

www.ck12.org 
59 
Gases have the following characteristics: 
. No definite shape (takes the shape of its container) 
. No definite volume 
. Particles move in random motion with little or no attraction to each other 
How tightly atoms and molecules are packed together is referred to as density. Solids are 
denser than liquids. Liquids are denser than gases. 
What Is Heat? 
Heat is the transfer of thermal energy between substances. Thermal energy is the energy 
causing the particles of matter to move. Temperature is the average measure of that 
energy. Thermal energy always moves from matter with greater thermal energy to matter 
with less thermal energy, so it moves from warmer to cooler substances. You can see 
this in the figure below. 
Faster-moving particles of the warmer substance bump into and transfer some of their 
energy to slower-moving particles of the cooler substance. Thermal energy is transferred 
in this way until both substances have the same thermal energy and temperature. 

www.ck12.org 
60 
As thermal energy is transferred, materials expand as temperature increases. The density 
of a substance is temperature dependent and usually decreases as temperature 
increases. Density is an important physical property of matter. It reflects how closely 
packed and the arrangement of particle in matter. For instance, a golf ball and a table 
tennis ball are about the same size. However, the golf ball is much heavier than the table 
tennis ball. Now imagine a similar size ball made out of lead. That would be very heavy 
indeed! What are we comparing? By comparing the mass of an object relative to its size, 
we are studying a property called density. Matter with less density will rise and matter 
with greater density will sink. 
How do you cool down a glass of room-temperature cola? You probably add ice cubes to 
it, as in the figure to the right. You might think that the ice cools down the cola, but in fact, 
it works the other way around. The warm cola heats up the ice. Thermal energy from the 
warm cola is transferred to the much colder ice, causing it to melt. The cola loses thermal 
energy in the process, so its temperature falls. 
Changes in States of Matter 
A change of state occurs whenever matter changes from one state to another, for 
example a solid changing to a liquid. This change is an effect of energy being transferred 
from one substance to another. Changes of state are physical changes, meaning they 
are reversible changes and do not change how molecules are combined. For example, 
when fog changes to water vapor, it is still water (H2O) and can change back to liquid 
water again. Matter may change back and forth between these states. 
As energy in a substance is transferred, it causes a change in its state. In the previous 
example, ice was added to a cola. The energy was transferred from the warmer cola to 
the cooler ice. This caused the ice to melt and change from a solid to a liquid. 
Types of Phase Changes 
Melting occurs when particles of a solid absorb enough energy to partly overcome the 
force of attraction holding them together. This allows them to move out of their fixed 
positions and slip over one another. The solid becomes a liquid. 
The process in which water or any other liquid changes to a solid is called freezing. 
Freezing occurs when a liquid cools to a point at which its particles no longer have enough 

www.ck12.org 
61 
energy to overcome the force of attraction between them. Instead, the particles remain in 
fixed positions, crowded closely together. 
When air cools, it can hold less water vapor, so some of the water vapor in the air changed 
to liquid water. The process in which water vapor—or another gas—changes to a liquid 
is called condensation. Another common example of condensation is pictured in the figure 
below. 
This picture shows the contrail (condensation trail) left behind by a jet. Water vapor in its 
exhaust gases condensed on dust particles in the air. 
Evaporation is the process in which a liquid changes to a gas. It occurs when individual 
liquid particles at the exposed surface of the liquid absorb just enough energy to 
overcome the force of attraction with other liquid particles. If the surface particles are 
moving in the right direction, they will pull away from the liquid and move into the air 
becoming a gas. 
Focus Questions: 
1. Draw a model that shows the motion of particles in a solid, liquid and a gas. 
2. What is the effect as heat energy is added to a bar of chocolate? 
3. Ice floats in water. What does this tell us about the ice’s density? 

www.ck12.org 
64 
6.2.3 Heat Energy 
Plan and carry out an investigation to determine the relationship between temperature, 
the amount of heat transferred, and the change of average particle motion in various types 
or amounts of matter. Emphasize recording and evaluating data, and communicating the 
results of the investigation. 
In this section, focus on the relationship between heat transfer and the 
average particle motion in matter. 
Heat Energy and Particle Motion 
When heat flows into an object, its thermal energy increases and so does its temperature. 
The amount of temperature increase depends on three things: 1) how much heat was 
added, 2) the size of the object, and 3) the material of which the object is made. 
Thermal energy and temperature are closely related. Both reflect the amount of moving 
particles of matter as energy. However, temperature is the average measure of that 
energy, whereas thermal energy is the total energy within a system. Does this mean that 
matter with a lower temperature has less thermal energy than matter with a higher 
temperature? Not necessarily. Another factor also affects thermal energy. The other 
factor is mass. 
The soup is boiling hot and has a temperature of 100 °C, whereas the water in the tub is 
just comfortably warm, with a temperature of about 38 °C. Although the water in the tub 
has a much lower temperature, it has greater thermal energy. This is because 
temperature is a measure of the average energy of the particles, rather than a measure 
of the total energy. The particles of soup have a greater average energy than the particles 
of water in the tub; the soup has a higher temperature. However, the mass of the water 
in the tub is much greater than the mass of the soup in the pot. This means that there are 
many more particles of water in the tub than particles in the soup. All those moving 

www.ck12.org 
68 
6.2.4 Engineering Design 
Design an object, tool, or process that minimizes or maximizes heat energy transfer. 
Identify criteria and constraints, develop a prototype for iterative testing, analyze data 
from testing, and propose modifications for optimizing the design solution. Emphasize 
demonstrating how the structure of differing materials allows them to function as either 
conductors or insulators. 
Engineering uses scientific knowledge to solve human needs and 
wants. In this section focus on how the structure of different materials 
helps them function as conductors or insulators. 
Engineering Design 
The process of designing a new technology includes much more than just coming up with 
a good idea. Possible limitations, or constraints, on the design must be taken into account. 
These might include factors such as the cost or safety of the new product or process. 
Making and testing a model of the design are also important. These steps ensure that the 
design actually works to solve the problem. This process also gives the designer a chance 
to find problems and modify the design if necessary. No solution is perfect, but testing 
and refining a design assures that the technology will provide a workable solution to the 
problem it is intended to solve. 
Engineering design can be accomplished in many different ways. Some of the steps have 
to be repeated, and the steps may not always be done in the same sequence, but there 
are some basic steps to solving an engineering problem. First, an engineer defines the 
problem that needs to be solved, and researches what criteria and constraints they will 
need to consider. In order to generate many possible solutions, engineers brainstorming 
Consider the problem of developing a solar-powered car. Many questions would have to 
be researched in the design process. For example, what is the best shape for gathering 
the sun’s rays? How will sunlight be converted to useable energy to run the car? Will a 
back-up energy source be needed? After researching the answers, possible designs are 
developed. This generally takes imagination as well as sound reasoning. Then a model 
must be designed and tested. This allows any problems with the design to be worked out 
before a final design is selected and produced. 
Heat Energy Transfer: Thermal Conductors 
Conduction is the transfer of thermal energy between particles of matter that are touching. 
Thermal conduction occurs when particles of warmer matter bump into particles of cooler 
matter and transfer some of their thermal energy to the cooler particles. Conduction is 
usually faster in certain solids and liquids than in gases. Materials that are good 
conductors of thermal energy are called thermal conductors. 

www.ck12.org 
69 
Besides the heating element inside a toaster, another example of a thermal conductor is 
a metal radiator, like the one in the figure below. When hot water flows through the coils 
of the radiator, the metal quickly heats up by conduction and then radiates thermal energy 
into the surrounding air. 
Thermal Insulators 
One way to retain your own thermal energy on a cold day is to wear clothes that trap air. 
That’s because air, like other gases, is a poor conductor of thermal energy. The particles 
of gases are relatively far apart, so they don’t bump into each other or into other things 
as often as the more closely spaced particles of liquids or solids. Therefore, particles of 
gases have fewer opportunities to transfer thermal energy. Materials that are poor thermal 
conductors are called thermal insulators. Down-filled snowsuits, like those in the figure 
below, are good thermal insulators because their feather filling traps a lot of air. 
Another example of a thermal insulator is pictured in the figure below. The picture shows 
fluffy pink insulation inside the attic of a home. Like the down filling in a snowsuit, the 

www.ck12.org 
75 