CHAPTER 4
PARTS OF SPEECH
8. Words are divided into different kinds or classes, called Parts of Speech, according to
their use; that is, according to the work they do in a sentence. The parts of speech are
eight in number:
1. Noun.
2. Adjective.
3. Pronoun.
4. Verb.
5. Adverb.
6. Preposition.
7. Conjunction.
8. Interjection.
9. A Noun is a word used as the name of a person, place, or thing; as, Akbar was a great
King.
Kolkata is on the Hooghly.
The rose smells sweet.
The sun shines bright.
His courage won him honour.
Note: The word thing includes (i) all objects that we can see, hear, taste, touch, or smell;
and (ii) something that we can think of, but cannot perceive by the senses.
10. An Adjective is a word used to add something to the meaning of a noun; as,
He is a brave boy.
There are twenty boys in this class.
11. A Pronoun is a word used instead of a noun; as,
John is absent, because he is ill.
The book are where you left them
Page 4
12. A Verb is a word used lo express an action or state; as
The girl wrote a letter to her cousin.
Kolkata is a big city.
Iron and copper are useful metals.
13. An Adverb is a word used to add something to the meaning of a verb, an adjective, or
another adverb; as,
He worked the sum quickly.
This flower is very beautiful.
She pronounced the word quite correctly.
14. A Preposition is a word used with a noun or a pronoun to show how the person or
thing denoted by the noun or pronoun stands in relation to something else; as,
There is a cow in the garden.
The girl is fond of music.
A fair little girl sat under a tree.
15. A Conjunction is a word used to join words or sentences; as,
Rama and Hari are cousins.
Two and two make four.
I ran fast, but missed the train.
16. An Interjection is a word which expresses some sudden feel ing; as,
Hurrah! We have won the game. Alas! She is dead.
17. Some modern grammars include determiners among the parts of speech. Determiners
are words like a, an, the, this, that, these, those, every, each, some, any, my, his, one, two,
etc., which determine or limit the meaning of the nouns that follow. In this book, as in
many traditional grammars, all determiners except a, an and the are classed among
adjectives.
18. As words are divided into different classes according to the work they do in
sentences, it is clear that we cannot say to which part of speech a word belongs unless we
see it used in a sentence.
They arrived soon after. (Adverb)
They arrived after us. (Preposition)
They arrived after we had left. (Conjunction)
From the above examples we see that the same word can be used as different parts of
speech.
Exercise in Grammar 2
Name the part of speech of each italicized word in the following sentences, giving in each
case your reason for the classification:
1. Still waters run deep.
2. He still lives in that house
3. After the storm comes the calm
4. The after effects of the drug are bad.
5. The up train is late.
6. It weights about a pound.
Page 5
7. He told us all about the battle.
8. He was only a yard off me.
9. Suddenly one of the wheels came off.
10. Mohammedans fast in the month of Ramzan.
11. He kept the fast for a week.
12. He is on the committee.
13. Let us move on.
14. Sit down and rest a while.
15. I will watch while you sleep.
16. They while away their evenings with books and games.
A work from S. CHAND & COMPANY LTD.