
Chapter Four 
South Korea 
Introduction : Korean Peninsula is a country of East Asia. At the beginning of the 
20th century, Japan had captured this country. As a result, this country became a 
colony of Japan. After the world war is over, Korea became independent in 1945 and 
this country was divided into two parts in 1948 along 30∞ North latitude and the 
zigzag cease-fire line between South Korea and North Korea was demarcated as 
border line (Fig. 67). At present, South Korea calls Japan Sea as East Sea. 
Location : South Korea is located between 
32∞20¢ to 38∞00¢ North latitude and 
124∞00¢ to 132∞00¢ East longitude. The 
island named Tetha-Dongo and Tek Shima 
which are situated far from the main land 
are also included in this state. North 
Korea is situated in the north of this 
country, Japan Sea in the east, Korea 
Strait in the south and the Yellow Sea 
in the west. 193 kilometres wide 
Korea Strait connecting Japan Sea and 
Yellow Sea is situated between Japan 
and South Korea. 
Area and Population : Total area of 
South Korea is about 1,00,032 square 
kilometres occupying about 45 per cent 
of the total land of Korean Peninsula. 
About 4 crore and 89 lakh people live in 
this country and the density of 
population is about 489 persons per 
square kilometre. The people are of 
Mongoloid group. 
Physiography : The country is divided into three regions viz. : (1) The Mountainous 
Region, (2) The Plains Region, and (3) The East Coastal Region. The country covers 
about two-thirds of the mountainous region. Taebaek Hill Tracks of east coast extends 
from north to south. Gaema plateau is joined with Taebaek mountain in the south. 
Many places of hilly region are eroded by the waves of Japan Sea. Though the eastern 
slope of the mountain nearer to Japan Sea is steep but the western and the southern 
slopes are to some extent moderate which gives birth to the plain land and also created 
innumerable islands and canyons. The land slopes mainly towards west and south 
which is evident from the normal flow of the rivers. The plain lands of coastal areas 
between Japan Sea and Taebaek mountain are very narrow and gradully widens 
towards south (Fig. 68). 
Fig. 67 : Location of Cease-fire line in Korian Peninsula 
Tuman 
Korian Peninsula 
Russia 
Sea of 
Japan 
(East Sea) 
Imjin
Bukhan 
Namhan 
Han 
Geum 
Nakdong 
Yellow Sea 
(West Sea) 
Busan 
Seaul 
Pyongyang 
Taedong 
Amnok (Yalu) 
China 
Mt. Baekdusan 
Sinuiju 
Cease-fire line 0 62 Kilomitres
South Korea	 121 
1. The Mountainous Region : The 
mauntainous region is consisted of 
some scattered peaks, plateaus and the 
valleys. The soil of this region is 
formed of hard granite rock. The height 
of the main peaks of the mountainous 
region is more than 2,400 metres. The 
Gaema plateau joins the Taebaek 
mountain in the south. The broad, low 
and long plain seperating the plateau in 
the south-west has connected the south 
plains with west plains as a link road. 
2. The Plains Region : This area is 
formed of sand and rock. The coastal 
beach formed of sand is used 
specially for bathing. Most of the 
places of this region have been 
eroded by heavy rainfall. 
3. The East Coastal Region : The 
east coastal region is situated between 
east coastal line and Taebaek mountain. 
The east coastal plain land is very 
narrow. This region is not very wide 
and gradully widens towards the south. 
Rivers : There are many rivers in South 
Korea in comparison to the plain land. These 
rivers had great impact on the life style of 
the inhabitants and on the national industrial 
development of South Korea. The main 
rivers of South Korea are Nakdong (521.5 
kilometres) and Han (481.7 kilometres). The 
Han river flowing through the modern Seoul 
city helps to centralise the population and to 
increase the density of population in the 
central region. The rivers flowing into the 
Yellow Sea are comparatively longer and 
have widened gradually nearer to the outlet. 
The rivers remain navigable for a long 
distance, particularly during the high tide 
reaching to the height of about 10 metres. 
(1) Hantan, (2) Imjin, (3) Soyang, (4) 
Hongcheon, (5) Bukhan, (6) Han, (7) Namhan, 
(8) Geum, (9) Mangyeong, (10) Dongjin, 
(11) Yeongsan rivers have fallen into theYellow Sea in the west, 
Fig. 68 : Physiography of South Korea 
Fig. 69 : Main Rivers of South Korea 
Korea 
Bay 
North 
Korea 
Sea of Japan 
(East Sea) 
N 
Hwachon 
Chosuji 
Incheon 
Seoul 
Daejeon 
Nakdong 
Chucheongnom 
1915 
Gwangju 
Busan 
Daegu 
Huksan 
chedo 
Jejudo 
Hallsan 
1950 
Korea Strait 
Yellow Sea
Anmyondo 
Baengnyongdo 
1578 
Namhan 
0 62 Kilomitres 
0 62 Kilometres 
1 3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
13 
14 
15 
16 
1 2 
13 
10 
11 
9
8 
2 
South Korea 
Main Rivers 
Metres 
4000+ 
3000 
2000 
1500 
South Korea 
Physiography
Fig. 70 : Location of Airmasses in July in East Asia Fig. 71 : Location of Airmasses in January in East Asia 
Siberian 
Polar Continental 
Siberian Polar 
Continental
1012 mb 
1012 mb 
1020 mb 
Low pressure 
 
Central Asia 
Low 
pressure 
Low 
pressure 
High 
pressure High 
pressure 
JulyTropical Meritme January 
1000 mb 
1020 mb 
1020 mb 
Hawaiian 
Tropical Meritime 
Hawaiian 
Tropical Meritime 
Polar Meritime Tropical Polar front 
Polar front 
1000 mb 
1000 mb 
Inter tropical front 
Inter tropical front 
122	 Secondary Geography 
(12) Seomjin, (13) Nakdong, (14) Geumho, (15) Hwang and (16) Han river have 
fallen into the Korean Strait in the South (Fig. 69). 
The rivers falling into the Japan Sea are narrow and short, and the strong current helps 
to generate hydro-electricity. 
As the three sides of this country are surrounded by sea, the huge quantity of water 
has brought diversity in the life of Korean people and it has impact on the 
development on the navigation and shipbuilding industries of the country. 
Climate : South Korea being located in the temperate zone enjoys fully four seasons 
viz. Summer, Autumn, Winter and Spring. The warm and moist climate is felt during 
the Monsoon summer season from June to September (Fig. 70). This season is very 
comfortable as most of the times, the sky remains clear and the temperature remains 
moderate. The climate remains stagnant in Autumn (October). The winter (November 
to March) becomes cold and dry under the influence of Siberian high pressure. The ice 
flows from north-east to south-west with cold wave blowing along the side of the East 
coast (Fig. 71). As a result, snowfall occours in Northern part and severe cold is felt all 
over the country. Certainly, the South-east coast of the country remains warm due to 
the influence of the warm west current. Spring (April-May) remains dry and warm due 
to the influence of the high pressure. The seasons of low temperature and small rainfall 
is found to occur due to high temperature and heavy rainfall experienced after the 
warm and cold weather felt sequentially in four seasons. 

Due to the evaporation of moisture from the soil, a slight changed continental polar airmass while 
crossing the Gobe desert of China-Mongolia border, carry fine yellow coloured loess soil 
from the loess plateau of China and after crossing the Yellow Sea reaches South Korea. Due 
to the violent flow of this yellow desert storm, dust particles create abnormal situation. 
During the winter months, there is predominance of dust cloud in Korea for which visibility 
becomes poor. The tropical cyclone named as Typhoons occuring during summer season from 
July-August causes heavy loss of crops, households, lives and property. These storms are seen 
frequently at the fag end of this summer. Heavy rainfall occurs during this time and the wind 
blows 242.35 kilometres per hour. Typhoons gradually moves away from the continent due to 
the influence of Siberian high pressure in the month of October (Fig. 72). 
Continental Maritime front
South Korea	 123 
The variation of seasonal temperature is 
felt though the temperature of South Korea 
remains between 10∞ to 16∞ Celsius. The 
average temperature of the country lies 
between 23∞ and 26∞ Celsius in August and 
the temperature comes down to minus 6∞ 
and 7∞ Celsius in the coldest month of 
Januray. 
Snowfall and rainfall is recorded between 
1,000 to 1,800 millimetres in South Korea 
(100 to 180 centimetres). The central 
region of the country experiences rainfall 
between 1,100 to 1,400 millimetres (100 to 
140 centimetres) which accounts for about 
50 to 60 per cent of the annual rainfall of 
summer months. 
Natural Vegetation : The predominane of 
natural vegetation is found in the forest of the 
mountainous regions of South Korea. The 
forest has a mixture of both coniferous and 
deciduous trees. The southern plain regions 
are mostly covered by rainfed forests. In summer the trees are decorated 
with deep green, thick and large leaves but the leaves are dropped off during winter. 
Red pines of straight and hard trunk are also besides, Elm, Maple, Linven, Birch, and 
Ash trees, found in these forests. 
Agriculture : The slope of the most parts of the mountainous region is steep, covered 
with thin-soil layer with infertile soil and forest cover. It is difficult to grow rice or even 
vegetables under this condition. 19.8 per cent of total land is under agriculture. 
Extensive farming is practised in 8 per cent of the coastal plains and in the valleys. 7.2 
per cent people are farmers. The farmers remain busy during summer because of heavy 
Moonsoon rainfall. Cultivation is practised by means of irrigation during the dry season, 
particularly in winter. The rice growing land is much more wider in the southern and 
western parts of the country and Vegetables are cultivated by the side of the hilly areas. 
Vegetables are grown than rice more in east coastal plain land. Rice is used to cultivate 
in half of the total agricultural land. Fishing is the second important occupation. 
Rainfall is least in the month of April but this little rainfall is vital for rice cultivation. 
With the first shower, the lands are ploughed and seeds are sown. The rice plants grow 
fast with the rains. The rice growing lands are much more in the southern and western 
parts of the country. Rice is the main staple food. Rice is grown in more than half of 
the cultivable lands. The production of rice remains stable due to the invent of new 
varities of rice and its expansion of new innovative means every year of cultivating 
rice. Millet, barley, wheat, soyabean, peas or red beans are also grown. Rice is reaped 
in October and then the land is prepared for growing barley and wheat. These crops 
are harvested in June and July and rice plants are planted in the rainy days. The total 
yield of millet, barley, and wheat together is higher than that of rice. 
Fig. 72 : Route of Typhoons 
July 
September 
October 
November 
April 
February 
December 
May 
June 
30∞ 
20∞ 
20∞ 40∞ 
40∞ 
August 
50∞ 
20∞ 40∞
124	 Secondary Geography 
Mulberry, cotton, tobacco, flax and jinseng are produced specially as cash crops. 
Soyabean farming is abundant in South Korea. Recently, soyabean cultivation is 
decreasing as import of syabean is increasing day by day. The silk industry exits as an 
ancient glorious industry of South Korea but now it is flourishing. The demand of silk 
has increased in the internal market due to the increase of national income since 1970. 
As a result, silk processing industry is developing in the south-east area of the country. 
Cotton is gown abundantly in this country. Jinseng is an important agricultural 
product. The juice obtained from its roots prevents many diseases creating a high 
demand for it in the country and abroad. Jinseng and tobacco cultivation is 
encouraged by the government. 
Stock rearing has developed in South Korea. The cattle of South Korea is of high 
quality. A large number of cattle are exported every year to Japan. 
Natural Regions : South Korea is divided into five natural regions on the basis of 
physical features and characteristics of products. These regions are discussed below : 
1. Mountainous Region : The density of population is very low in this area though 70 
per cent of the total land is mountainous. The region having rugged surface and 
difficult access, is inhabited sparsely by the native aboriginals. The households in 
many cases have developed keeping some distance in between due to the scarcity of 
plain land for the growth of settlement. Though the inhabitants of this region have 
many problems, they do not only supply the forest and underground resources but still 
they do supply the oxygen and also play an important role in keeping the 
environments in balance in controlling the flood and drought. Besides, the charming 
natural scenery of mountainous region is notable as tourism wealth. 
2. East Coastal Strip Region : This narrow coastal region is cut off from the other 
areas of the country. The inhabitants of the villages are primarily inclined to fishing 
pursuit. They catch fish off the coast in small boats using traditional methods. They 
grow rice and millets in the narrow strip of agricultural rings located into hinterland of 
the coastal area. Tides have little influnce in this coast. 
3. South-East Region : This region is formed in the piedmont regions of the 
mountainous slopes surrounded with Naknong basin. Silk culture has expanded 
considerably in this part of the country. This area has an excellent transport and 
communication system. The port of Busan is located in this area. 
4. South-West Region : This part of the country formed by the agricultural basins is 
very important. Two crops are grown annually. Rice is harvested in October and wheat 
or barley before the start of rain in June. Silk culture is also gaining importance. 
5. North-West Region : The Gyeonggi province of Metropolitan area is closely 
connected with the capital of Seoul. This is a very small area of South Korea. A single 
crop is grown in this region because of extreme cold weather. Wheat, millet, and 
soyabean are produced here. This is the mining area of South Korea. 
Minerals : South Korea has comparatively little deposit of mineral resources. The 
coal mines are mainly located in the province of Gangwon. The production of coal is 
highest in this province. A small quantity of limestone, tungsten, silver, zinc, iron ore, 
copper, lead, graphite and coal are available here. Production of coal is higher than 
other minerals. The coal is of anthracite quality.
South Korea	 125 
Industry : South Korea is trying to progress its development through Labor-oriented 
light industry, heavy chemical industry and Technology-based Hybrid industry. The 
availability of coal and iron ore have accelerated the fast growth of industry in South 
Korea. South Korea is developed in the cotton and woollen industries. Local cotton is 
mixed with imported cotton and high quality cotton cloth is manufactured to meet the 
local demand. Extreme cold in winter has created the demand for woollen cloth that 
has helped the expansion of woollen cloth industry. Production of silk manufacturing 
of cloth has grown here as cottage industry. South Korea imports silk as a raw 
materials at a lower price from China, and exports the silk products after meeting the 
local demand through colouring, desiging and weaving of silk. Besides, Petrochemical 
industry, chemical yarn, machine tools, shipbuilding indurtry, 
telecommunication, motor car, iron and steel industry, cement and electronics industry 
have flourished here. 
Transportation and Communication : The complex geo-physical structure of 
mountainous area creates great obstacles in communication system. Inspite of 
constructing many roads, the villages become disconnected from the outer world 
during snowfall in winter. Railways and roadways are the principal means of 
communication. The railways in the south and south-east region is connected with the 
railway system in the west through a wide corridor. According to 2010 census, the 
country has 1,04,983 kilometres of roads and 3,399 kilometres of railways. After 
1960’s, the Communication system is very much developed while the number of 
roads, national express highways, motor vehicles are increased along with economic 
development of this country. In 1960’s, the industrial railway has been flourished to 
procure underground resources. In 1970’s, Bingal Track main railway line was made 
double and triple track. In 1974, underground railway and recently Express railway 
have been commissioned. As a result, distance becomes less between place to place. 
In 2000 A. D., North and South Korea is connected with railway communication 
system. So, the transportation of goods gradully is increasing. The neighbouring 
countries are connected through waterways while the distant countries by sea and air. 
The communication system by air is comparatively more with the neighbouring 
countries. 
Foreign Trade : Inspite of having a large population, South Korea exports the surplus of 
food grains and industrial goods to foreign countries. The trade relation with China and 
Japan is much healthier. It has also trade relationship with Taiwan, Philippines, 
Bangladesh, India, the oil rich countries of the Middle East and the United States of 
America. High quality garments, electronics, computer parts and shipbuilding 
industries have turned South Korea into one of the most prosperous countries of Asia. 
Foreign markets have been opened for export. Rice, soyabean, silk and fish are 
imported. Iron, machineries, paper, medicines and cotton of high quality are the main 
imported items. 
Cities and Ports : Seoul is the capital of South Korea. Busan is the oldest and biggest 
port. These two cities are quite different in prosperity and progress in comparision to 
other cities. Inchon is the second largest port. Daegu, Daejeon, Gwangju and Mokpo are 
other important cities.
126	 Secondary Geography 
Population and Development Trend 
Population : National industrialisation and urbanization has improved a lot in South 
Korea during the decades of 1960 and 1970. Besides, huge population migrated from 
the village to the towns specially in Seoul. As a result, population has increased 
rapidly in metropolitan area. In recent years, many of the inhabitants of Seoul has 
immigrated in the Suburb areas of the city. According to the census of 2009, it is 
found that the country’s population accounts for 16.8 per cent in the age group of 
0-14, 72.6 per cent in 15-64 age group and 10.7 per cent in 65+ age group. The rate of 
population growth in South Korea is 0.29 per cent, birth rate 15.63 per cent, death rate 
4.98 per cent, net migration rate 0.9 per cent, infant mortality rate 20.9 per cent and 
the life expectancy is 80.08 years. A number of different tribal people live in this 
country. The Chinese population is about 20,000. All above the age of 10 years, can 
read and write. 95 per cent of the total population is literate. 
Development Trends : South Korea achieved its independence from foreign rule in 
1945. Since then, the country has recorded consistent economic growth. Behind this 
growth, there has been the export oriented planned economic development. According 
to world population data sheet of 2010, the Annual Gross National Income (GNI) of 
this country was 28,120 US Dollars. The economy of the country has been kept 
enliven through stable labour market, strong pressure of inflation and rapid growth of 
savings in banks. According to the census of 2008, about 2 crore 43 lakh and 47 
thousand people used to participate in economic activities which accounts for 61.8 per 
cent of the total population of which 75.9 per cent are indirectly engaged in social, 
capital and other services, 10.9 per cent in mining and industries, 7.2 per cent people 
in agriculture, forestry, and fisheries. 
South Korea 
What we learnt from this chapter : 
Location and area : South Korea is a country of East Asia. North Korea is in its 
north, Japan Sea to the east, Korea Strait to the south and Yellow Sea to the west. The 
strait of Korea has seperated South Korea from Japan. Total area of this country is 
1,00,032 square kilometres and about 4 crore and 89 lakh people live in this country 
with a density of 491 persons per square kilometre. 
Physiography : This country is divided into three parts according to its physical 
structure. (1) The Mountainous Region, (2) The Plains Region, and (3) The East 
Coastal Region. 
Climate : South Korea enjoys the maritime temparate Climate. In summer, wind 
blows from south-east and in winter from north-west. The summer monsoon causes 
rainfall during April to September. But the winter monsoon coming from the mainland 
of Asia being dry does not give any rainfall. The month of March is the time for 
cyclonic storms and the months from July to August for Typhoon. 
Natural vegetation : The forests in South Korea have a mixture of conifereous and 
deciduous trees. The deciduous forests are in the mountainous region and the plains 
have rainfed forests. 
South Korea	 127 
Agriculture : 20.6 per cent of the total land of the country is used for agriculture. 
Rice is the principal crop. Rice is grown in the southern and western parts of the 
country with wet farming system. Mulberry, soyabean, cotton, tobacco, flax and 
jinseng are produced as cash crops. 
Mineral resources : Small amount of limestone, silver, zinc, tungsten, iron ore, 
copper, lead, graphite and coal are mined in the country. Anthracite coal is available 
here. 
Industry : Though the coal and the iron ore exist in South Korea but still a 
mentionable quantity of raw meterials are imported. The industries are flourishing 
rapidly in this country. Cotton and woollen cloth manufacturing are the principal 
industries. Silk cloth production is treated as cottage industry. Chemical yarn, petrochemical, 
machinery, cement, shipbuilding industries, electronic industries have 
developed fast. 
Transport and communication : Railways and roadways are extensively used for 
transportation and communication. The communication system in the south is 
comparatively more developed. Trade and communication with foreign countries are 
also maintained by sea and air. 
Foreign trade : Rice, Soyabean oil, silk, fish, high quality garments, electronics, 
computer mechineries are exported and the iron and steel machineries, paper, 
medicine, high quality cotton, motor car, ships, semi-conductor and mobile phones are 
imported. 
Population and development trend : According to 2009 census, the rate of 
population growth in South Korea is 0.29 per cent, the birth rate 15.63 per cent, death 
rate 4.98 per cent, net migration rate 0.9 per cent, infant mortality rate 20.9 per cent 
and life expectancy is 80.08 years. The country achieved independence from foreign 
rule in 1945 and attained continuous economic development. According to world 
population data sheet of 2010, the Annual Gross National Income (GNI) of this 
country is 28,120 US Dollars. The economy of South Korea has been kept enliven 
through stable labour market, strong pressure of inflation and rapid growth of savings 
in the banks. Nearly 2 crore people belong to the labour force of the country. 
Exercise 
Multiple Choice Questions 
1. 			Which two Seas below are the connectors of Korean Strait? 
	a. Yellow Sea and South China Sea 	b . Japan Sea and Yellow Sea 
	c. Japan Sea and Sulu Sea 		 	d. Caspian Sea and Red Sea 
Notice the population age structure of South Korea in the graph and answer the 
question number 2-4.
128	 Secondary Geography 
2. 	The age structure of South Korea is shown in the figure. 
	a. In the bar graph 		 	b . In the pie chart 
	c. In the line graph 		 	d. Population p yramid 
3. 	Which age group of the population is the maximum in South Korea? 
	a. Baby 	 	 	 	b . Juvenile 
	c. Middle-aged 	d. Old 
4. 	Which is correct for South Korea? 
	i. Number of acti ve people's excessiveness is about 0-14 years 
	ii. Number of acti ve people's excessiveness is about 15-64 years 
	iii. Less people o ver 65 years of age 
	 Which is correct below? 
	a. i 	 	 	 	 	b . ii 
	c. iii 	 	 	d. i, ii and iii 
Creative Questions 
1. 		The climate of South Korea is influenced by the sea. In this country it rains during 
April to September under the influence of the Monsoon wind. The dry monsoon 
wind blowing over the main land of Asia doesn’t cause any rainfall in winter season. 
In this season, cultivation is practised by means of irrigation. A single crop is grown 
in the extreme cold zone annually. In other regions, two crops are grown annually. 
Inspite of this, South Korea exports the surplus of food grains by meeting the 
domestic demands. The availability of some important mineral resources have 
flourished the industries of South Korea. 
a.				What is about the climate of South Korea? 
b. 		Explain the causes of surplus production of food grains in South Korea. 
c. 	Identify the important similarities of the climates of Bangladesh and South 		 
Korea and list them. 
d. 	Which important natural advantages make a rapid progress in the industrial 
sector of South Korea? Explain. 
100 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10
0 
Population Percentage 
0-14 15-64 65+
The Middle East	 129 