
Part One 
Mathematical Geography 
Chapter One 
Luminaries and Solar System 
Luminaries 
The boundless sky is all around our abode, the earth. This vast infinite sky is called 
the firmament or the space. However, the scientists term it as a place where all the 
particles and energy of the universe are concentrated or floating. The space has no 
beginning or end. There are infinite number of luminaries in the firmament. If we 
look at this infinite space, we see the sun at day time and at night we see innumerable 
dots of light including the moon. These luminaries are revolving on their own axis 
with a particular speed in a very disciplined manner. The sun is a star and the moon 
is a satellite. These stars and their planets and satellites are called the luminaries. 
Previously only the bright objects 
found in the space were called the 
luminaries but now the existence of 
many objects that do not give light 
have been discovered. Nowadays 
luminaries include the moon, the sun, 
planets, stars, meteors, comets and 
besides, faded nebulae, pulser, Black 
Dwarf, Black Holes are also included. 
All these have formed the universe. 
Stars : If we look at the blue and 
bright night sky, we see many dots of 
light twinkling. There are many such 
luminaries in the firmament which are 
called the stars (Fig. l). We can see 
only a few thousands of stars with our 
naked eyes. Some of this can be 
seen from earth with the help of powerful telescope. The scientists, with the help of 
powerful telescope have discovered more than 100 crores of such stars. The stars are 
actually burning gaseous mass. Every star has its own light and heat. 
Fig. 1 : Location of stars in the sky 
CANOPUS 
SOUTH
Luminaries and Solar System	 3 
On looking from the earth, the stars seem to exist in same plane. The distance of the 
stars from the earth is measured by the velocity of the light. The unit of measurement 
from the earth to the stars or from stars to stars is called light years. Since the sun is 
the near most star, its distance from the earth is about 15 crore kilometres. A ray of 
light from the sun takes 8 minutes 19 seconds to reach the earth. 
The star next to the sun is Proxima Centauri. It is about 38,00,000 crore kilometres 
from the earth. Scientific discoveries have enhanced our knowledge about the stars. 
Some of the stars are round, some are spiral or lineal while some others are shapeless. 
The density of Black Dwarf and Black Hole is very high and their gravitational force 
is also very strong. 
Constellation : Looking at the cloudless sky in a dark night, one can see a number of 
stars clustered together. These are called constellations. The astronomers in the past, 
connecting every individual constellation with imaginary lines and imagining different 
figures, gave them strange names. Of them, the names of Great Bear, Orion, 
Cassiopeia, Little Bear, Canis Major, Eridanus etc. are worth mentioning. 
Galaxies : Billion of stars, dusts and huge pool of vapour have formed clusters of 
luminaries which are called galaxy or the universe of stars. There are innumerable 
galaxies in the space. Galaxies are far apart from each other. The milky way is a small 
part of a galaxy. 
The Milky Way : The cluster of stars that look like a brightly illuminated long 
pathway extending from north to south in the dark sky is called the milky way. A 
milky way is formed of millions of stars, some scientists take it to be a huge circular 
region. Some other scientists consider it to be a coiled up hard nebulae. Looking at the 
clear and cloudless night sky in winter, one would see a long line of translucent and 
radiant lustre of light with a wide vicinity extended north to south. That is known as 
the milky way. Our solar system including the sun is included in one of such a milky 
way. The sun is positioned among billions of stars in this milky way. 
Nebulae : The covering of the dimly lit stars in the space is called the nebulae. They 
are visible with naked eyes or with powerful telescopes. Some of the nebulae are full 
of gaseous bodies. They have strong forms. These are called gaseous nebulae. The 
scientists think that many nebulae are far away from our milky way. One nebulae may 
contain billions of stars. Since the nebulae are billions and billions of light years away 
from the earth, the stars between them cannot be identified separately. The milky way 
is in the same plane with the nebulae. 
Meteors : Sometimes in the cloudless night sky it looks as if a star is running about or 
a star has just dropped off. This event is known as drop off of a star. These are not 
actually stars. They are called meteors. Innumerable physical masses float in the 
space. The gravitional force causes these physical masses rush towards the earth with 
a violent speed. When they come in touch with air, the friction with air makes them 
flare up. Majority of the meteors are small in size.
4	 Secondary Geography 
Comets : Sometimes a kind of luminaries appear in the space. They exist for a short 
period and then disappear. They are called comets. Comets are amazing celestial body. 
They revolve a long way around a star. When they come near the sun, they become 
visible in the form of cloud. Gradually, the bright centre point looms like hair veiled 
in mist. Then comes out as a long steamed tail just like a bright broom. The English 
word comet has been derived from the Greek word ÔKomet’ that means dishevelled 
hair. Comets exist in the solar system. The astronomer, Edmund Halley observed that 
the comets follow the law of gravitation in the space. The comet he discovered is 
known as Halley’s Comet which appears every 75 years. Halley’s comet appeared in 
1759, 1835, 1910 and 1986. 
Planets : Some celestial bodies revolve round the sun as a result of the gravitional 
force. They have no light of their own. All of them rotate round the sun and get light 
and heat from it. They do not twinkle in the sky. These luminaries are called planets. 
The Earth, Mars, Venus, Saturn, Mercury, Jupiter, Uranus and Neptune are the eight 
planets of our solar system. 
Satellites : Some luminaries are caused by the gravitational force to rotate around a 
planet. They are called satellites. They have no light or heat of their own but they get 
light and heat from the sun or stars. The moon is the only satellite of the planet earth. 
Every planet may not have satellite. Mercury and Venus have no satellite. The 
satellites of the Saturn are the highest in number. 
The Solar System 
The huge universe beyond our vision is called the space. The space is so huge that it is 
very difficult for us to conveive it. There are stars, comets, planets, satellites, meteors 
and other heavenly bodies in the space. The universe is formed of these innumerable 
celestial bodies. The sun is considered as a star of the universe. The solar system 
includes the sun, its planets and satellites, billions of meteoroids and thousands of 
comets (Fig. 2). The sun is the centre around which all other members of the solar 
system revolve. All the activities of the solar system centre around the sun. The solar 
system is quite small compared to the vastness of the amazing universe. The earth is 
quite insignificant. The solar system is many billion times larger than the earth in size. 
The solar system also includes various gaseous substances and dust particles. The 
gravitional force of the sun make all the planets, satellites, comets and meteors to 
rotate around the sun. The solar system is many times larger in area than the earth. 
Sun : The sun is actually, a star. It is a yellow coloured star of moderate size among the 
billions of stars in the milky way. Its diameter is 13 lakh and 84 thousand kms. and mass 
is nearly 1.99 × 1013 kilograms. Of all the luminaries in the solar system, the sun has a 
very important place. Our relationship with the sun is very close. The sun is a heated 
star. The temperature at the centre of the sun is about 150,000,000° Celsius and at the 
surface it is about 6,000° Celsius. It is the source of light and heat of the earth but also of 
other planets and satellites. The earth would have been eternally dark without sun light. 
There would be no pulsation of life and no animal or plant would live in this world.
Luminaries and Solar System	 5 
The planets of the solar system are arranged according to their distance from the sun 
such as Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune. Of all the 
planets, Jupiter is the largest and the Mercury, the smallest. The description of these 
planets as arranged in the above order is given bellow : 
Mercury : Mercury is the smallest planet of the solar system. It is nearest to the sun 
from where the average distance is 58 crore kilometres and the diameter of this planet 
is 4,850 kilometres. The planet takes 88 days to rotate once round the sun. So, for 
Mercury 88 days make a year. It takes 58 days and 17 hours to revolve round its own 
axis. So, one day of Mercury is equivalent to our 58 days and 17 hours. The 
temperature of the planet is very high because of its closeness to the sun. The metals 
like zinc or lead dissolves into vapour in such temperature. There is no atmosphere in 
Mercury. There is no cloud, rain, wind or water and hence life is non-existent in this 
planet. The picture that was sent by the space craft Mariner-10 in 1974 shows that the 
surface of the Mercury is quite similar to that of the moon. It is rugged and full of 
holes. There are innumerable hills and plain lands. Mercury has no satellite. 
Venus : You must have heard about the morning star or the evening star and might 
have seen it too. Venus is, in fact, not a star. It glows in the sky like a star which 
prompts us to call it a star. Venus is covered under dense cloud. Naturally, the sun is 
never visible from its surface. The sun is 108 crore kilometres from Venus. The Venus 
is the nearest planet to the earth. There is little difference of light between day and 
night. The dense cloud in Mercury is formed of carbon dioxide cloud. The rain that 
falls here is actually acid rain. The diameter of the Mercury is 12,104 kilometres. It 
takes 225 days for the Venus to revolve round the sun. Venus rotates on its axis very 
slowly. The sun rises twice and sets twice in the sky of Venus. Venus has no satellite. 
Earth : Earth is the third closest planet to the sun. The average distance of the earth 
from the sun is 15 crore kilometres. Its diameter is nearly 12,667 kilometres. The 
Fig. 2 : Solar system 
Moon 
SUN 
Venus 
Asteroids 
Saturrn 
Neptune 
Uranus 
Comet 
Jupiter 
Mars 
Mercury 
Earth
6	 Secondary Geography 
earth takes 23 hours 56 minutes and 4 seconds to rotate on its own axis. The earth 
takes 365 days 5 hours 48 minutes 47 seconds to revolve round the sun once. So, one 
year is equivalent to 365 days. The moon is the single satellite of the earth. The earth 
is the only planet in whose atmosphere there is existence of required oxygen, nitrogen 
and temperature that is necessary for the survival of plants and animals in the world. 
Hence, the earth is considered as the most important planet of the solar system. 
Mars : The orbit of the earth is next to earth in the solar system. Its diameter is about 
6,787 kilometres which is half of the earth. The average distance of this planet is 22.8 
crore kilometres from the sun and 7.7 crore kilometres from the earth. Mars has two 
satellites. One of them is Phobos and the other is Deimos. The day and night in Mars 
are nearly the same as that of the earth is respect of period of time. The earth takes 
365 days to revolve round the sun. Whereas the Mars takes 687 days. The planet takes 
24 hours and 37 minutes to rotate on its own axis. There are gorges and volcanoes in 
the surface of the Mars. The planet has little oxygen and water but the quantity of 
carbon dioxide is so high that the existence of life is not possible. The planet looks 
reddish since the rocks became rusty getting in contact with oxygen as the available 
reports show. 
Asteroids : There is no planet within a distance of 56.31 crore kilometres from Mars. 
There are many little luminaries in this vast space. All these luminaries having a 
diameter ranging from 1.6 kilometres to 805 kilometres are called Asteroids. The 
scientists have identified the orbits of thousands of Asteroids. As all these remain in a 
group, hence called Asteroids. 
Jupiter : Jupiter is called the king of the planets because it is the largest planet. Its 
diameter is 1,42,800 kilometres. It is 1,300 times larger than the earth in area. Its mass 
is twice as much as any other planet in the solar system. This Planet is 77.8 crore 
kilometres from the sun. The temperature of the surface of atmosphere is very low but 
in the interior, it is quite high. The average temperature is 125° Celsius. Jupiter takes 
nearly 12 years to revolve round the sun but it takes 9 hours 53 minutes to rotate on its 
own axis. So in one day as of our earth, the sun rises twice and sets twice in this 
planet. The scientists have discovered, so far, 16 satellites. Of these, Lo, Uropa, 
Ganimed and Callistro are the major satellites. The scientists think that heavy 
atmosphere exists here. 
Saturn : Saturn is the second largest planet of the solar system. The sun is 143 crore 
kilometres away from Saturn. It is actually a huge gaseous globe and its diameter is 
1,20,000 kilometres. Saturn is 760 times greater than that of the earth. Saturn takes 29 
years and 5 months to revolve round the sun once but rotates on its own axis in 10 
hours 40 minutes. There are thousands of rings surrounding the Saturn having 
different colours. Saturn has 22 satellites outside its ring. Of these Titan, Hua, Dion, 
Capitus and Tethris are remarkable. The surface of the Saturn remains covered by ice. 
The atmosphere contains hydrogen, a mixture of helium, methane and ammonia gas.
Luminaries and Solar System	 7 
Uranus : Uranus is the third largest planet. In order of distance from the sun its place 
is seventh. It is located at a distance of 287 crore kilometres from the sun. The planet 
takes 84 years to complete a single rotation round the sun but it takes only 10 hours 49 
minutes to rotate on its own axis. Its diameter is nearly 49,000 kilometres. It is very 
light because it is formed of light substances. The atmosphere contains high 
percentage of methane. Average temperature 170° Celsius. Recently, scientists have 
discovered some rings round this planet, but these rings are not bright. Uranus has 5 
(five) satellites such as Mirinda, Ariel, Ambriel, Titania and Oberon. 
Neptune : In order of distance from the sun, Neptune is placed in 8th position. It is 
about 450 crore kilometres from the sun. This planet has got feeble light and heat. 
Neptune in area is equivalent to 72 earths and 17 earths in mass. Its Diameter is 
48,400 kilometres. The atmosphere which is formed of the mixture of gas mainly 
methane, ammonia and other gases. This planet was first sighted by the scientists in 
1846. It has two satellites such as Triton and Neroid. Moreover, two rings have been 
recently discovered to exist round this planet. 
Luminaries and Solar System 
What we learnt from this chapter : 
Luminaries : The planets, stars, satellites, comets, meteors, pulsar, Black Dwarf, 
Black Holes that exist in boundless space are called the Luminaries. 
Stars : At night and clear sky, the luminaries that twinkle in the space are called stars. 
Nebulae : The covering of the dimly lit stars in the space are called nebulae. 
The Milky Way : The brightly, illuminated long pathway running from north to south 
formed by cluster of stars is called the milky way. 
Comets : Sometimes a kind of luminaries appear in the space. They exist for a short 
period and then disappear. They are known as comets. Halley’s comet appear in the 
sky every 75 years. 
Planets : The celestial bodies having no light or heat of their own revolve round the 
sun. They are called planets. The earth, mercury, saturn etc. are the planets. 
Satellite : The celestial bodies that revolve round a planet are satellites. The moon is a 
satellite. 
The Solar System : The family of celestial bodies that include the sun and its planets, 
satellites, asteroids, comets, and meteors is called the solar system. There are eight 
planets in the solar system. They are Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Saturn, Jupiter, 
Uranus and Neptune.
8	 Secondary Geography 
Diameter of the  
planets (kms.) 
Planets The rotation  
of the sun 
The differences of rotation 
between the nearest two planets 
Exercise 
Multiple Choice Questions 
1.			The sun and its planets, satellites, asteroids, comets and meteors are together 		 
form - 
	a. Uni verse 	b . Solar system 
	c. Luminaries 	d. Constellation 
2. 	Why the earth is only worthy place for living for plants and animals? 
	i. The necessary oxygen and nitrogen are in the atmosphere 
	ii. The nitrogen is much in the atmosphere than oxygen 
	iii. The green plants of the earth receive carbon dioxide and leave out oxygen 
	 Which one is correct below? 
	a. i 	b . ii 
	c. iii 	d. i, ii and iii 
Notice the table given below and answer question number 3 and 4. 
3.	Which planet is medium in size? 
	a. Mercury 	b . Earth 
	c. Mars 	d. Venus 
4.		What is the rotation difference in days between Mars and Jupiter? 
	a. 2,693 	b . 3,693 
	c. 4,693 	d. 5,693 
Creative Questions 
1.			Seeing her interest about the space, the maternal grand father told Dipti that it is a 		 
vast world. There are many stars, planets, satellites, meteors, nebulae in this 	 	 
universe. Many planets and satellites are moving around the sun. Of these planets 		 
the earth has worthy environment for plants and animals to live. 
a.			What is the name of the planet rings surrounding in it? 
b. 	Why it is not possible for living organism to exist to the 4th planet revolve	 	 
round the sun? 
c.			Show the earth and its two nearest planets by drawing the Solar System. 
d.			ÔThe Earth is the only planet for animals and plants to live on it’- explain.