
Chapter Five 
The Middle East 
Introduction : Afghanistan, Iran, Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, 
Oman, Yemen, Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Syria, Palestine, Israel, Lebanon, Turkey, Cyprus 
and Egypt are combinedly known as the Middle East. 
Location : The Caspian Sea and the Black Sea are situated on the north of the Middle 
East, Aegean Sea, the Mediterranean Sea, Libya, and the Red Sea on the west, Sudan, 
Arab Sea, and the Gulf of Persia on the south, and Pakistan on the east. The whole of 
the Middle East is located between 13∞ North latitude to 42∞ North latitude and 25∞ 
East longitude to 74∞ East longitude and 50∞ East longitude has crossed through the 
middle of the Middle East. 
Area and Population : Total area of the Middle East is 78,42,364 square kilometres. 
The region is 4,505 kilometres long from east to west while from north to south it is 
3,379 kilometres. There are 18 states of which all except Israel are Muslim states. 
Israel is Jewish state. In respect of area, Saudi Arabia ranks first, Iran second, Egypt 
third, Turkey fourth and Afghanistan fifth. At resent, the total population of this region 
is 40.31 crore and the density of population is 51 persons per square kilometres, but 
the density of population is much higher in the Nile, Euphrates and Tigris. In respect 
of population, Egypt ranks first, Iran second, Turkey third, Iraq fourth, and Saudi 
Arabia fifth. Again in respect of density of population Bahrain is placed first, 
Palestine second, Lebanon third, Israel fourth and Kuwait fifth. 
Area, population, density of population of the different countries with their capitals 
have been presented in Table 5. 
People, Religion and Language : Majority of the people are Caucasian, people of 
diverse faith that includes Islam, Christianity, Judaism and Druz live here, but 96 per 
cent of them are Muslims having two sects namely Sunni and Shia. The people speak 
Persian and Postu according to their places of origin. However English speaking 
people are few in number. 
Physiography : The Middle East is divided into three divisions according to its 
physical features. (1) Mountainous region, (2) Plateau and highlands, and (3) Plains. 
1. Mountainous Region : The Hindu Kush mountain extending to the west from the 
Pamir Plateau is located in the north of Afghanistan. The mountains Elburz and 
Zagros proceeding towards west have met the Armenian Knot. The two mountains 
Pontic and Taurus coming out from the Armenian Knot to the west, are situated in the 
north and south of Turkey respectively.
130	 Secondary Geography 
Fig. 72 : Political map of the Middle East
The Middle East	 131 
Table 5 : Area, population, density and the capitals of the Middle East countries, 2010 
Name of the Country Area 
(sq. kms.) 
Population 
(in crore) 
Density of 
population 
(per sq. kms.) 
Capital 
I. Eastern Region 
Afghanistan 
Iran 
6,47,500 
16,48,000 
2.91 
7.51 
45 
46 
Kabul 
Tehran 
Total 22,95,500 10.42 45 ----- 
2. Central Region 
Iraq 
Kuwait 
Bahrain 
Qatar 
United Arab Emirates 
4,37,072 
17,820 
665 
11,437 
83,600 
3.15 
0.31 
0.13 
0.17 
0.54 
72 
174 
1955 
149 
65 
Baghdad 
Kuwait 
Manama 
Doha 
Abu Dhabi 
Total 5,50,594 4.30 78 ---- 
3. South Region 
Saudi Arabia 
Yemen 
Oman 
21,49,690 
5,27,970 
2,12,460 
2.92 
2.36 
0.31 
14 
45 
15 
Riyadh 
Sanaa 
Muscat 
Total 28,90,120 5.59 19 ---- 
4. West Region 
Turkey 
Syria 
Jordan 
Lebanon 
Israel 
Palestine 
Egypt 
Cyprus 
7,80,580 
1,85,180 
92,300 
10,000 
20,770 
6,220 
10,01,450 
9,250 
7.36 
2.25 
0.65 
0.43 
0.76 
0.40 
8.04 
0.11 
94 
122 
70 
409 
366 
643 
80 
119 
Ankara 
Damascus 
Amman 
Beirut 
Jerusalem 
Ramallah 
Cairo 
Nicosia 
Total 21,06,150 20.00 95 ---- 
Grand Total 78,42,364 40.31 51 ---- 
Source : World Population Data Sheet, 2010 
132	 Secondary Geography 
2. Plateau and Highlands : The Iran Plateau located between Hindu Kush and Elburz 
in the north and Zagros in the south have actually occupied most of the areas of 
Baluchistan, Afghanistan and Iran. The height of the plateau ranges from 902 metres 
to 1,504 metres with average height of 1,200 metres and its central part is relatively 
low. 
The Anatolian plateau stands between Pontic and Taurus mountain. Its average height 
is 750 metres. The plateau slopes down to the west. 
Arabian plateau is formed nearly of the entire Arab and Senai Peninsula. The western 
part is quite high and slopes gradually to the direction of the Persian Gulf in the east 
to meet the plain. In the east there are some highlands to the east of the river Nile of 
Egypt. 
3. Plains : The river basin of the Nile of Egypt and Mesopotamia between the river 
Euphrates and the Tigris is the principal plain region of the Middle East. These two 
plains washed by rivers are very fertile because of alluvial soil. There are plains of 
North Iran near the Caspian Sea, plains of South Iran in the east of Persian Gulf, and 
the Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Kuwait plains in the west of Persian 
Gulf, the narrow plains of the Arabian Peninsula by the Red Sea and the small plains 
in the north of Afghanistan by the south of Amudariya. The Nile basin is the principal 
plain of Egypt. 
Climate : It rains in winter in the narrow west coast of the Middle East. In other 
places, the rainfall is very little. The wide difference between the winter and summer 
temperature and extreme weather is the main characteristic of this region. The small 
amount of rain mostly fall as frost in Afghanistan. The cold is extreme in the plateau 
of Iran and there is frost at night. In summer, the sky-remains cloudless and the wind 
is dry and as such extreme heat is felt. The cyclonic wind from the Mediterranean Sea 
causes rainfall in winter in Iraq but scorching heat is the general characteristic of 
summer. The Mediterranean coast of Turkey is the warmest. The valleys in the coast 
of the Aegean Sea has cool summer and cooler winter season. In the Syrian coast it 
rains in winter but the interior is without rain and remains dry. Southern part of Syria 
is becoming desert. Jordan experiences no rain in summer and gets rain in winter. The 
Mediterranean climate is felt in Lebanon, Palestine and Israel. Saudi Arabia is also 
without rain, dry and arid.
The Middle East	 133 
Fig. 73 : Physical structure of the Middle East
134	 Secondary Geography 
Climatic Regions : Distance from the sea, the continental location and the influence of 
local land formation have created three climatic regions in the Middle East. 
1. Hot Desert Climatic Region : The Arabian Peninsula and Egypt are included in this 
climate. The difference between winter and summer is extremely felt in South Syria, 
South Iraq, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Oman, the United Arab Emirates and Qatar. 
The air remains always dry and without aqueous vapour. Cyclonic winds rarely 
produce rain. 
Fig. 74 : Climatic region of the Middle East 
2. Cold Desert Climatic Region : This region includes Iran and Afghanistan. Aqueous 
vapour has no access because the place is surrounded by the mountain walls. So there 
is no rain but the place is very cool because of height. The difference of temperature 
between summer and winter is very wide and so the climate here is extreme. 
3. Mediterranean Climatic Region : Turkey, Syria, Lebanon, Palestine, Israel, Sinai 
Peninsula, Cyprus and part of Egypt are included in this climatic region. The westerly 
wind causes rain in winter but the dry trade wind coming from land cannot bring rain in 
summer. Since not a single part of the region is far from the sea, the climate is not extreme. 
Agricultural System : Since plain land is scarce, agriculture has not flourished much 
in all the countries of the Middle East. Agriculture has actually developed in the river 
valleys and deltas. Most of the places of the Middle East have dry agriculture system. 
Irrigation farming is practised in the river valleys. Crop rotation system of agriculture 
is followed in Iran. 
Cold Desert Climatic Region 
Mediterranean Climatic Region 
Hot Desert Climatic Region 
CASPIAN SEA 
Middle East 
Climatic Region
The Middle East	 135 
Wheat is the main staple food of the people of this region. Wheat is grown in every 
country. Barley, maize, rice, millet, beet, cotton, tobacco, dates, silk, and different 
kinds of citric fruits are other agricultural products depending on places. Stock 
farming is also found in suitable areas. 
Agricultural land in Afghanistan records one-fifth of its total land holding. The 
northern plains and river valleys in that country are widely used for farming. 
Sometimes irrigation is needed. Wheat, barley, rice, maize, beet, cotton and tobacco 
are the leading agricultural products and fruits as grapes, pomegranate, pear and 
walnut are also grown. Stock farming is also practised for wool and meat. 
Iran’s agricultural land accounts for only 10 per cent of the total land. Excepting the 
coast of the Caspian Sea and the Persian Gulf, crops are grown elsewhere by 
irrigation. Wheat, rice, maize, fruits, cotton, tobacco, opium, grapes and tea are the 
principal agricultural products. In the dry grassland, sheep and goats are tended. 
Fishing has developed considerably. Iraq is chiefly an agricultural country but only 
one, sixth of the land is used for agriculture. Inspite of its soil being alluvial, the 
production is not very high. In the southern part barley, rice and date while in the 
northen part barley, wheat and juicy fruits are produced. Among the cash crops, cotton 
is placed next to date. Fine quality Egyptian cotton is grown in the area between the 
Euphrates and Tigris river. Kurdistan produces lot of tobacco. Mulberry plants are 
grown for silk worm in the district of Baghdad. 
Fig. 75 : Landuse in the Middle East 
Subsistence Farming 
Nomadic Stock Farm 
Few Economic Activ 
Shifting Cultiva 
Oasis 
Other Uses 
Fishing Area 
LEGEND 
LANDUSE IN 
MIDDLE EAST
136	 Secondary Geography 
In Turkey farming is done only in 30 per cent of its total land area though agriculture 
is the chief means of livelihood of its inhabitants. In the plateau region the principal 
product is the wool and skins of the goats known as Mohair. Wheat and crops are also 
grown in favourable environment. Tobacco, olive, silk, fig, grape, nut and other dry 
fruits and cotton are produced in the coastal areas. 
Syria is also mainly an agricultural country. Crops are grown in the Euphrates valley 
with the help of irrigation. Tobacco is grown in the coast but cotton is produced in 
North Syria. Camel, horse, sheep, goat and thick tailed sheep are raised in the 
grassland areas. Dates are grown in abundance in the oasis. 
The valleys are developed into intensive farming areas of Lebanon. Wheat, barley, 
tobacco, grape, olive and orange are grown. Farming is also practised extensively in 
the plains near west coast and Beka valley. Tobacco is grown extensively in 
abundance in the coast. 
Agriculture has not developed much in Jordan. Wheat, barley, maize, turnip, oat, 
grape and olive are the principal agricultural products. Farming has developed in the 
plains of Israeli coast. Wheat, barley, millet, potato, olive, orange, fig and grapes are 
grown in the fertile lands of Palestine. Scarcity of water has, however created some 
obstacles in the agricultural practices. Wheat and barley are grown in winter and 
maize and turnip in summer in the plain lands. Intensive farming of fruit has 
developed in the northern part. Fruits are grown in plenty in this country. 
In Saudi Arabia, crops are grown in highlands and oasis. Dates, wheat, barley, maize 
and millet are the main products. Coffee is grown in favourable condition. 
Natural Vegetation : No vegetation excepting grass and thorny shrubs are grown in 
the hot and cold desert areas extending from the Arab desert to the border of 
Afghanistan. In the Mediterranean climatic region comparatively smaller trees grow. 
But there is no grassland because the summer is totally without rain. Temperate mixed 
tall plants grow in the north of Turkey and Iran. In the dry plateaus of Iran, thorny 
bushes are the only vegetation. Gum Arabia is collected from these thorny bushes. 
Valuable trunk wood are collected from the forest in the slopes of Elburz mountain. 
Deciduous trees grow in the coastal plains and Elburz mountain. Turkey has a number 
of forests in the north, north-west and south. Fine quality oak, beech, far, elm, lime 
and pine are available in the deep forest of the east of Pontic mountain. Soft and hard 
wood are collected from the plains in the south. 
Mineral Resources : The Middle East has a very rich deposit of mineral substances 
in different countries. But due to underdeveloped communication system and lack 
of proper technological knowledge, these valuable minerals could not be tapped. 
Although in Afghanistan there are deposits of copper and iron ore, lead, silver, 
sulphur and salt in plenty but they are not mined. Iron ore is deposited in Kurdistan, 
copper ore in Hindu Kush, and lead ore in Hazara. Iran is rich in mineral deposits 
but there is not much progress in mining excepting petroleum oil. Majority of the oil 
fields of this country are located in the south-western part. Masjid-e-Sulaiman,
The Middle East	 137 
Haftkhel, Pachshara, Agazari, Naft-e-Safid and Lali are the famous oil fields. The 
largest oil refinery of the world is in Abadan of Iran. 
Oil is pumped through pipes to Abadan from different oil fields. Coal and iron ore are 
mined in north-west Iran. Lead, manganese, copper, nickel, borax, chromite, zinc, 
sulphur, salt, rock and marble stones are available in Iran. Petroleum is the principal 
mineral product of Iraq. Kirkuk, Khanakil, Hadita, Habburnia, Bosra, Khurram Shah 
and Mosul are the reputed oil fields. Petroleum is taken to Haifa of Israel and Tripoli 
of Lebanon through 1,850 kilometres long pipe from Kirkuk and exported abroad. 
Naft Kharech is an important oil field in South Iraq. Kifri produces lignite. This 
country also produces a little quantity of mineral salt and gypsum. Turkey is also rich 
in mineral substances. Coal, iron ore, copper, petroleum, chrome ore, manganese, 
lead, zinc, antimoni, mercury and sulphur are the major mineral products. Lebanon 
produces a little quantity of lignite, asphalt and bitumen. Potash, mineral salt and 
phosphate rock are mined in Jordan. Israel has limited production of the mineral 
substances such as manganese, gold, copper, chromium, lead and magnesium, 
sulphur, limestone and gypsum are also available. This country also produces potash, 
Fig. 76 : Minerals and industrial area of the Middle East 
bromite and petroleum. Petroleum is the major mineral product of Saudi Arabia. 
Shower, Ab Quaik, Damman, Hufuf, Saphania, Bahrain, Katik and Khurmania are the 
principal oil fields. 
MAIN MINERALS AND 
INDUSTRIAL AREA OF 
MIDDLE EAST 
LEGEND
COPPER 
GOLD 
TEXTILE 
INDUSTRY 
WOOLEN 
SUGAR 
INDUSTRY 
OIL FIELD 
OIL REFINERIES 
OIL PIPE LINE 
COAL 
IRON ORE 
LEAD 
CEMENT IND.
138	 Secondary Geography 
Industry : Recently there has been considerable development of industry in the 
Middle East. Iran has developed production of modern machineries. Among many 
industries cement, sugar, cotton, silk, wool weaving and turpentine production are 
famous. Cigarette, soap, glass, fruit, and leather preservation industries have also 
flourished in this country. Tabriz, Ispahan, Tehran, Shahbad, Kerman and Samused are 
the principal industrial towns. 
Iraq has not developed much in machinery producing industry. The weaving industry, 
cement, soap, cigarette, vegetable, oil industries are worth mentioning. Of the 
weaving industries blanket, carpet, wool, cotton, and silk cloth are famous. At present, 
Iraq has set up chemical industries, sugar industries and oil refineries. 90 per cent of 
the industries are located in Baghdad while Mosul, Kirkuk and Bosra are other 
industrial cities. 
Turkey has developed sugar, cotton weaving, wool weaving, glass, fig preservation, 
milk products and rose elixir processing industries. Lebanon has also developed 
cotton, silk and rayon industries. The metal work has become a cottage industry in 
Beirut and Tripoli. Food processing industry is another important addition. Salt 
refineries, oil refineries, tannery industries have grown up in Jordan besides food and 
fruit processing plants and cotton weaving industry. 
Israel has cotton and woollen weaving industries in Haifa and Tel Aviv. There are 
many small industrial plants and cottage industries in the Jewish settlement area. 
Small weaving plants have been set up in Majdal in Arab settlement. The small lace 
industry in Nazareth has earned good reputation. The diamond industry has grown up 
in Nathania and Tel Aviv. Motor cars factory and household utensils assembly plants 
have developed with the help of imported parts. The industries in Israel are glass, 
paper, fertilizer, chemicals, rubber and plastic industries. Palestine is famous for small 
and cottage industries. There are many cottage industries in the highlands of Judaea. 
The small weaving industries of Gaza are well known. 
Transport and Communication : Since ancient times, the camels, horses and mules 
were used as beasts of burden to transport goods in the Middle East. Band of 
merchants ran between the capital and the ports in Saudi Arabia, Iraq and Iran. 
Now the communication system has developed as bus and trucks ply in wide metalled 
roads and highways. Roads are the only means of communication in Afghanistan. 
There are about 6,700 kilometres of road. Airways are used to travel to the 
neighbouring countries. 
Iran has 2,600 kilometres long railway but roads have greater importance for 
transportation and the motorways are as long as 24,200 kilometres. Motorways and 
roads play comparatively more effective roles in internal trade. Teheran, Tabriz, 
Meshed and Ispahan are the main airports and one can go abroad by air.
The Middle East	 139 
The two rivers Tigris and Euphrates are lifeline of communication system of Iraq. 
Tigris is navigable round the year. The riverways have contributed considerably 
towards the development of trade and commerce in this country. The railways are 
extended northward from Bosra. Some of the railways are partly metre gauge. The 
railway stretching from Baghdad to Bosra is of standard gauge. 
Turkey depends mainly on railway communication though it has 74,000 kilometres of 
roads. The trade and industry centres are connected by roads and railways. Airlines 
maintain communication between Ankara and Istambul. Roads, railways and airways 
have developed in Syria considerably. Goods are transported by caravans of camels in 
the desert areas. 
Lebanon has got roads, railways and airways. Roads and railways are developed in both 
the plains and mountainous regions. Standard gauge of railway lines are used in the 
plains while the mountainous regions have metre gauge lines. Beirut is the main airport. 
Jordan has got roads, railways and airways. Camels are extremely used in the 
plateaus. Roads have passed through the settlement areas. The western part of the 
country has a long railway line having a number of branches. Amman is a principal 
airport. 
The roads in the plains of Israel are straight and wide having been 3,500 kilometres 
long. The railway lines in Israel are of standard gauge. 
Palestine : An agreement was signed in 1994 
in the United States of America between Izac 
Rabin, Prime Minister, Israel and Yasir 
Arafat, President, PLO on the understanding 
that self administered Palestine is formed of 
Samara and Jerico of Israel, the two occupied 
small cities located on the west coast of 
Jordan rivers and Gaza strip. The area of 
Palestine during that time was 2,410 square 
kilometres and the total population was only 
17.31 lakh. At present, the total area is 6,220 
square kilometres and the total population is 
0.40 crore. Palestine has to depend either on 
roads or caravan of camels. 
The principal cities of Saudi Arabia are linked 
by improved road communication. One can 
go from Jeddah to Mecca and Medina by 
motor car. Motorways have connected Nazaf 
near Baghdad with Medina while railway has 
connected Dahrain, a port in Persian Gulf, with Riyadh capital of Saudi Arabia. 
Fig. 77 : Palestine 
JORDAN 
EGYPT 
(Sinai)
140	 Secondary Geography 
Majority of the habitations in Egypt have been developed in the Nile valley and so, the 
river Nile has become the leading means of communication. The Suez Canal of Egypt 
is very significant in respect of international trade. The main railway line runs from 
Alexandria to Aswan via Cairo. Another railway line runs parallel to Suez Canal 
connecting Suez port in the south with port Said in the north. Cairo-Suez railway is 
also important. Egypt has both unmetalled and metalled roads and in the desert has 
camel path. 
Foreign Trade : The hides and skins, cotton, carpet, dates, fruits, gums, wool, marble 
stone, including petroleum are exported from different countries of the Middle East. 
Cotton cloth, tea, sugar, machineries, railway carriage, motor cars, consumer goods, 
spices, medicine, paper etc. are imported. Middle East countries have trade 
relationship with the United Kingdom, Germany, Belgium, Netherlands, Italy, Spain, 
Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, India, Pakistan and other countries. 
Manpower : The countries in the Middle East have considerable limitations in 
technological know ledge and moreover manpower is also limited. This has resulted in 
large number of manpower import. Many engineers, doctors, nurses, technicians, 
skilled and unskilled labour and drivers from Bangladesh are working in different 
countries of the Middle East. The country is being benefitted by the foreign currency 
they sent, particularly in the field of economic development and standard of living. 
The Middle East 
What we learnt from this chapter : 
Location, area and population : The Caspian Sea and the Black Sea are located in 
the north of the Middle East the Aegean Sea, the Mediterranean Sea, the Libya and 
Red Sea in the west, Sudan and Arab Sea in the south and Pakistan in the east. 
Total area of the Middle East is 78,42,364 square kilometres and the density of 
population is 51 per square kilometre. People of Islam, Judaism, Christianity and 
Druz faith live here. 96 per cent of them are Muslims. 
Physiography : According to its physical structures, the Middle East can be divided 
into three divisions viz. (1) Mountainous region, (2) Plateau and highlands and (3) 
Plains. Elburz and Zagros have extended towards north, Pontic and Taurus towards 
west from Armenian Knot. Anatolia and Arabia are the principal plateaus. 
Mesopotamia and the Nile basins are the two remarkable plains. 
Climate : Extreme weather is the salient feature of the Middle East climate. 
Difference between summer and winter season is insignificantly wide and the rainfall 
is quite insignificant excepting the narrow strip of west coast. The climate of the 
Middle East is divided into (a) Hot Desert, (b) Cold Desert, and (c) Mediterranean 
Climatic Regions. 
Agriculture : Since the quantity of plain land is scarce, the agriculture has flourished 
only in the river valleys and deltas. Wheat is the main agricultural crop. Barley, 
The Middle East	 141 
maize, millet, rice, beet, cotton, tobacco, date, silk and different kinds of fruits are 
grown in this region. 
Natural Vegetation : In the hot and cold desert regions, no plant excepting the thorny 
shrubs and grass can grow in the north of Iran and Turkey, temperate mixed tall 
vegetations are found. 
Mineral Resources : Petroleum is the principal mineral product of the Middle East. 
Besides, Copper ore, iron ore, lead, silver, gold, sulphur, mineral salt, manganese, 
nickel, borax, chromite, zinc, marble stone, coal, antimony, mercury, asphalt, potash, 
phosphate, limestone, gypsum are mined in little quantity depending on the nature of 
the places. 
Industry : In the Middle East, cotton and woollen weaving, match, soap, sugar, silk, 
carpet, cigarette, glass and skin preservation industries have been developed in 
varying degree in various countries. The industrial products are consumed to meet the 
local demand. 
Transport and Communication : Roads are the leading means of communication of 
the Middle East. Roads in every country are very developed and fit for motor traffic 
round the year. Railway has not been developed in all the countries. Only in Egypt 
and Iraq, passengers and commodities are transported by rivers in limited area. 
Capitals of every country are connected with foreign countries by air. 
Foreign Trade : Petroleum is the main exportable item of the Middle East. Other 
exportable items are hides and skins, different mineral products, cotton, carpets, dates, 
fruits, gums, wool, marble stone, cotton cloth, tea, sugar, cloth, machineries, railway, 
railway carriages and motor cars, consumer goods, wool, medicine, paper etc. are imported. 
Exercise 
Multiple Choice Questions 
1. 	Which one is the non-Muslim country in the Middle East? 
	a. Lebanon 		 	 	 	b . Turkey 
	c. P alestine 	 	d. Israel 
2. 	Which statement is correct against the mineral resources of the Middle East? 
	i. The Middle East is very rich in mineral substances 
	ii. The most of the mineral substances of the Middle East is exported as the raw 	 
	 materials 
	iii. Petroleum is e xported from Baghdad to Israel through Haifa 
	 Which one is correct below? 
	a. i 	 	 	 	 	 	b . ii 
	c. iii 		 	 	 	 	d. i, ii and iii 
142	 Secondary Geography 
3. 	Which country in the table above is densely populated? 
	a. Saudi Arabia 	 	 	 	b . Yemen 
	c. Oman 		d. K uwait 
4. 	Which one below is more reasonable in terms of plenty of export labour 	 
	demand in Saudi Arabia? 
	a. 	High labour-wage, scarcity of labour power and primitive agricultural system 
	b . 	Scarcity of labour power, technical and technological knowledge 
	 c. 	Scarcity of population, primitive agriculture and lack of technological knowledge 
	 d. 	Limitations of primitive agricultural system, technical and technological 	 
	 	kno wledge 
Creative Questions 
1. A vast area of the Middle East has plains and mountains. Its desert and 
mountainous climate region is extreme. Yet, in many countries in the Middle East 
there are some plain land and plateaus where agricultural work is being done. 
Abdullah is a farmer in the plateau of Turkey. Turkey along with other countries 
of the Middle East has shortage of workers of different professions as well as in 
agriculture. In order to fill up this shortage of human resources the countries of 
the Middle East import manpower from the other countries of the world. 
a.	 What kind of agricultural method is employed in most of the places in the 	 
	Middle East? 
b.	Wh y is the climate of the Middle East extreme? 
c.	Explain what type of f armer is Abdullah on the basis of the climate and plateau? 
d. 	How far is it correct to you about the way of importing human resources of 	 
	 the Middle East from the outside world in order to fill up the shortage? Give 	 
	reasons for your answer . 
Use the table below and answer question number 3 and 4. 
Countries Area 
(sq. kms.) 
Population 
(in crore) 
Saudi Arabia 21,49,690 2.92 
Yemen 5,27,970 2.36 
Oman 2,12,460 0.31 
Kuwait 17,820 0.31 
Bangladesh	 143 