Chapter Two 
Latitude and Longitude 
Some imazinary lines extending from east to west and from north to south are drawn 
on a map of the world to determine the location of any place. These lines are known 
as the parallels of latitude and the meridians of longitude respectively. In geography, 
latitude and longitude are two important topics. One can determine the location of a 
place with the help of latitude and longitude. With the location of the longitude, one 
can determine the time of that place. Moreover, the northern and the southern position 
of any place can be determined through latitudes. Similarly, the western and the 
eastern position of any location from the Prime Meridian can be ascertained by 
longitude. Degree of latitude or a part of it is known as the latitude, while the degree 
of longitude of a part of it is termed as longtitude. 
Latitude : Before we learn what is actually meant by the degree of latitude, we will 
have to have an idea about the axis, the equator and parallels of latitudes. The 
imazinary line which runs north to south through the centre of the earth is known as 
axis. The northernmost point of this axis is known as the north pole and the 
southernmost point is the south pole. Keeping both the poles in equal distance, an 
imazinary line has been drawn which encircles the globe from west to east is known 
as the equator or the terrestrial equator. Due to the spherical shape of the earth, this 
line is also circular. So, this line is also known as the equatorial circle. 
The equator has divided the earth into two equal halves. The part lying north to the 
equator is known as the Northern Hemisphere and that to the south as the Southern 
Hemisphere. With the help of the 
equator, one can determine the angular 
distance of a place situated either in the 
northern or in the southern hemisphere. 
So, to find out the angular distance of a 
place upon the surface, the only thing 
is to be done is to connect with an 
imazinary line, any point of that place 
with the centre of the earth. Again, the 
meridian which passes over that point 
ultimately meets the equator on a 
certain point, and that the meeting 
point is connected by an imazinary line 
with the centre of the earth (Fig. 3). 	 
Fig. 3 : Angular distance from equator
10	 Secondary Geography 
Fig. 4 : Equatorial plane, north pole and south pole 
The imazinary line is actually the radius of the earth sphere. The value of the angle 
thus formed through those two lines is equivalent to the latitude of that particular place. 
Therefore, the latitude is the angular 
distance of a place north or south of 
the equator. If a line is drawn from 
any place on the earth to its centre 
then that line will create an angle with 
the equatorial plane. The value of that 
angle is the latitude of that place (Fig. 
4). The latitude of a place situated to 
the north of the equator is desigrated 
as the north latitude and that of the 
south as the south latitude. The total 
value of the angle created by the 
circle at the centre of the earth is 
360°. These angles are being 
divided into degrees (°), minutes (' ) and seconds ('' ). Thus the value of the equator is 
0°. The latitude of the north pole is 90° North and that of the south pole is 90° South. 
This is because that the angular distance of each of the poles is 90° from the equator. 
These angles are being divided into degrees and minutes and on the basis of these 
angles, the imazinary lines are drawn 
parallel to the equator. These are 
known as the parallels of latitudes. 
The latitudes are parallel to one 
another and every one of them is a 
full circle. The circumference of the 
latitudes decrease with the increase of 
their values. Some of the parallels arc 
quite important. The 23.5° latitude in 
the northern and southern hemispheres 
are known as theTropic of Cancer 
and the Tropic of Capricorn respectively. Besides, the 66.5° north and south latitudes 
are known as the Arctic and Antarctic circles respectively (Fig. 5). The equator is 
known as the great circle. The degree of latitude of all the places located in the same 
parallel is the same. 
Fig. 5 : Latitude and longitude 
A 
B 
PRIME MERIDIAN 
0° 
15° 
15° 30° 
NORTH POLE 
90° N 
ARCTIC CIRCLE 
TROPIC OF 
CANCER 
EQUATOR 
0° 
E 
W 
TROPIC OF 
CAPRICORN 
ANTARCTIC CIRCLE 
30° S 
30° N 
30° 
45° 
60° 
75° 
66 1° 
2 S 
66 1° 
2 N 
23 1° 
2 N 
23 1° 
2 S 
90° NORTH POLE 
EQUATORIAL 
PLANE 
0° EQUATOR 
SOUTH POLE 
30°
Latitude and Longitude	 11 
The latitude of the region near the equator, in other words, the latitudes having the 
value of 0° to 30° are called the low latitudes. Similarly, latitudes having the value of 
30° to 60° are known as the mid latitude and those of 60° to 90° are the high latitudes. 
There are different methods of determining the latitude of a place. Out of them we are 
discussing about two methods. 
(a) With the help of a pole star, and 
(b) With the help of a sextant and the position of the sun in the horizon. 
(a) Determining latitude with the help of a pole star : We know that the earth is 
divided into two hemispheres, the northern hemisphere and the southern hemisphere. 
Every night from any place of the northern hemisphere one can see the pole star in a fixed 
position in the northern sky. But the altitude of the pole star from the horizon does not 
remain the same. It differs with the difference of the place, that means, the altitude of the 
pole star in the horizon is different for different places. In the equator, the location of the 
pole star is in the horizon and its altitude is 0°. From the equator towards north pole for 
every 1° of approach the altitude also increases by 1°. Ultimately in the pole, the altitude 
of the pole star rises to 90°. So, the degree of latitude for the equator is 0° and that of the 
north pole is 90°. In other words, the degree of latitude increases with any approach 
towards the north pole. Thus the latitude of any place in the northern hemisphere is 
equivalent to the degree of altitude of pole star. So, the latitude of any place can be 
derived from the altitude of the pole star. But it is not possible to determine the latitude of 
any place in the southern hemisphere by the pole star, nor possible to determine the 
latitude through this method in day time. 
(b) Determination of latitude by sextant : Sextant is an instrument by which the 
altitude of the sun can be measured. The latitude of any place can be determined after 
finding out the altitude of the noon sun with the help of a sextant. The following formula 
can be applied to find out the latitude of a place. 
The formula is : 90° minus the altitude of the sun at noon ± the sun’s declination. 
So, the latitude = 90°- altitude of the sun - declination 
	= 90 °- 50°-15° = 90°- 65° = 25° south. 
If the place under consideration is in the northern hemisphere then it will require to 
add the declination value of north and to subtract the declination value of south. 
Similarly, if the place is in the southern hemisphere then the declination value of south 
is to added and that of the north to be subtracted.
12	 Secondary Geography 
Meridians of Longitude 
The terrestrial equator can be graduated to degrees, minutes and seconds and through 
these points imazinary lines can be drawn from north to south pole which are known 
as the meridians of longitude. The 
longitudes are also known as 
meridians. The meridian which passes 
through the Greenwich can be taken 
as the Prime Meridian and the angular 
distance of the meridians can be 
measured from the prime meridian 
(Fig. 6). 
Prime Meridian 
The meridian which passes from north to 
south pole through Greenwich in the 
neighbourhood of London is termed as the 
Prime Meridian. The value of this line has been determined as 0°. 
Other meridians of longitudes can be drawn through the angular distance from the 
Prime Meridian. For example, the meridians that lie 45° East of the prime meridian is 
known as 45° East Longitude or east meridian and all the places lying on this 
longitude has the same longitudinal value of 45° East Longitude. So, we can say that 
the longitude of any given point on the globe is measured as an angular distance 
eastward or westward from the prime meridian. We further know that the longitude of 
the prime meridian is 0°. The value of the angles created by the circumference at 
centre of the earth is 360°. So, if 360° meridians are drawn from pole to pole at equal 
interval of 1°, then they will lie at 1° of longitude apart. Hence, the total number of 
360° meridians are equally divided into two parts of 180° each in the western and the 
eastern side of the prime meridian. As the earth is a sphere, so the 180° east and west 
longitude is virtually the same line. Like that of the latitudes, the longitudes can also 
be divided into minutes and seconds. One minute of longitude is 1/60th part of a 
degree of longitude. The value of both the latitude and longitude will be 0° when the 
prime meridian crosses the equator vertically. And this point has been recognised as a 
place located somewhere in the Gulf of Guinea. 
Determination of longitude : The longitude of a place can be determined by two 
methods. These are : (I) by the difference of local time, (2) by Greenwich mean time. 
(1) By the difference of local time : We know that the earth is a sphere. It has been 
moving continuously around its own axis from west to east. Consequently different 
places of the earth have been facing the sun at different times. Whenever, the meridian of 
Fig. 6 : Longitude and angular distance 
NORTH 
SOUTH 
WEST LONGITUDE 
PRIME 
MERIDIAN 
EAST LONGITUDE 
W 90° 90° E 
100° 100° 
120° 120° 
140° 160° 160° 140° 180° 
80° 60° 40° 40° 60° 80° 20° 20° 0°
Latitude and Longitude	 13 
any place comes in front of the sun i.e. when the sun appears just overhead, then it is 
considered as noon and the local time is taken as 12 noon. Ultimately other times of 
the place are determined on the basis of local time. We know that there is a difference 
of 4 minutes of time for 1° of difference of longitude. In other way, we can say that 
for every 4 minutes, the longitude differs by 1°. For example, if in any place, the local 
time is 12 noon, then the local time for any place located 5° east of the previous place 
will be 12.00 noon + (5° × 4 minutes) = 12 hours 20 minutes. For the place lying 5° 
west of the former place, the local time would be 12.00 noon - (5° × 4 minutes) = 
12.00 - 20.00 minutes = 11 hours 40 minutes. 
(2) By Greenwich mean time : We all know that the longitude of Greenwich is 0°. 
The actual time of Greenwich can be read from the Chronometer. To determine the 
longitude of a place by sextant, one will have to record the highest altitude that the 
sun attains there at noon and that position will have to be treated as 12.00 noon. The 
longitude of the place mentioned above can now be determined from the difference of 
time that occurs between the indicated place and Greenwich. If the place is located 
east of Greenwich then the local time would be more than that of Greenwich and if it 
is located west of the Greenwich, its local time would be less than that of Greenwich. 
Differences between parallels and meridians : 
1. All the parallels of latitude are parallel to each other but the meridians are not; 
2. All the parallels are full circles and the meridians are half circles; 
3. The lengths of each of the meridians are equal but that of parallels are not equal; 
4. Parallels always run in a east-west direction, whereas the meridians in a north-	 	 
south direction; 
5. The highest value of parallel is 90°, whereas that of meridian is 180°. 
Local and Standard Time 
Local Time : Everyday the earth moves round her axis from west to east. As a result, 
the sun appears earlier in the places located in the east. Due to rotation of the earth, 
the sun reaches the zenith of the sky, or in other words, the sun reaches its highest 
altitude on a certain place and that hour is treated as 12.00 noon. On the basis of this 
noon time, the other time for the day is determined. The time thus determined is the 
local time for that place. So, the local time of a place is determined on the basis of the 
highest altitude of the sun which can be observed with the help of a sextant. 
The earth at the centre creates 360°. The earth requires 1,440 minutes (24 hours × 60 
minutes) to cover this distance of 360° for one time. So, the earth needs 4 minutes 
(1,440 ÷ 360) to rotate 1° of longitude. Therefore, for 1° difference of longitude, the 
difference of time will be 4 minutes. 
Standard Time : If the sun’s noon position on the meridian is taken as 12 O’ clock 
and if that is accepeted as the basis of determining the local time then this would 
create confusion in maintaining, time among the different parts of the same country. 
14	 Secondary Geography 
To avoid this confusion each country of the world has introduced a new concept of 
maintaining time known as standard time. The standard time of the country is that 
time which passes through the central part of the country. 
There may be several standard times for a large country like the United States of 
America and Canada. The United States of America has four different standard times, 
whereas Canada has five. In those countries, more than one standard time has been 
introduced to run administration and other works more efficiently relating to postal, 
railway, wireless, telephone etc. The local time of Greenwich (0° meridian) has been 
accepted as the standard time for the world. Accordingly, the standard time in 
Bangladesh is six hours ahead of Greenwich time. 90° East meridian has passed 
through the middle part of the country and the standard time of Bangladesh is 
calculated from the local time of that meridian. 
Antipodes : Antipode means the relative position of two places which are situated on the 
earth’s surface just opposite to each other. To locate the antipode of a place an imazinary 
straight line is drawn through the earth from that place to the opposite position 
which passes through the centre. The 
point where this line touches the 
opposite side of the globe is the 
antipodal position to the former point 
(Fig. 7). That means the later point is 
the antipodal to the former point. 
If the latitude of a place is known then 
the latitude of its antipode can be 
ascertained. The latitude of a place 
will be the same as that of its 
antipode. The two places must be 
situated on the different sides of the 
equator, that means one is in the 
northern hemisphere and the other 
one in the southern hemisphere. So, if 
the latitude of a place is 70° North, then the latitude of its antipode will be 70° South. 
The total value of the meridian of a place and that of its antipode will always be 180°. 
The meridian of a place if be east, the meridian of the antipode would be west. For 
example, the antipode of 40° East longitude will be 180°-- 40° = 140° West longitude. 
The difference of time for these two places will be 12 hours. In fig. 7, the point B is 
the antipode of A. The antipode of Dhaka is situated in the Pacific near Chile of South 
America. 
Fig. 7 : The antipodes
Latitude and Longitude	 15 
International Date Line 
Travelling towards east or west from any place will require adjustment of local time 
which ultimately creates problems even for adjustment of days of the week. This 
problems stands acute if anybody crosses 180° longitude towards east or west from a 
particular place. To avoid this problem or an imazinary line has been drawn absolutely 
over the waterbodies from north to south. This imazinary line is known as 
International Date Line. 
Necessity of the International Date Line : 
We know that for the difference of 1° of 
longitude, there is a difference of time of 4 
minutes. So, for every 15° of longitude, 
there will be a difference of an hour. Thus 
travelling eastward from prime meridian 
(Greenwich) up to 180°, one would be 12 
hours ahead of the schedule and travelling 
westward 12 hours behind the schedule. If it 
is 10 A.M. on Monday in Greenwich, then 
the corresponding time would be 10 P.M. on 
the same day at 180° East longitude, 
whereas, the time at 180° West longitude 
would be 10 P.M. on the previous day i.e. 
Sunday. But 180° East or 180° West 
longitude is virtually the same longitude. 
So, it is observed that the local time differs 
by 24 hours or one day in the same 
longitude. There is a change of day and date 
if one crosses this line which is known as 
the International Date Line (Fig. 8). 
Any ship or aeroplane sailing towards 
east from Greenwich will have to 
subtract one day and sailing towards 
west will have to add one day to adjust with the local time. 	 
The International Date Line is virtually 180° east and west longitude. It crosses 
through the Aleutian on the north-eastern part of Siberia, Fiji and Chatham islands. To 
avoid the problems of adjusting local time, the International Date Line has been so set 
that it passes only over the waterbodies turning 12° towards east just near the Bering 
Strait, 7° towards west near the Aleutian islands and 11° towards east near Fiji and 
Chatham islands. Had it not been drawn this way, the people would have to count two 
different local times in two different parts of the same island.	 
Fig. 8 : International Date Line
16	 Secondary Geography 
Determination of Longitude and Time 
Question 1. Two places, one located at 40°30¢ east and the other 50°30¢ west of 
Dhaka. What will be the local time of these two places when it is 8 A.M. at Dhaka? 
Solution 
The longitudinal difference of the first place from Dhaka is 40°30¢. 
For the difference of longitude, difference of time would be 
	= 	(40 ° × 4) minutes + (30¢ × 4) seconds 
	= 	160 minutes + 120 seconds 
	= 	160 minutes + 2 minutes =162 minutes 
	= 	2 hours 42 minutes. 
First place is located towards east of Dhaka, so the local time will be more than that of 
Dhaka. Now to determine the local time of the first place it requires to add 2 hours 42 
minutes with the local time of Dhaka. Therefore, the time will be 
	= 	(8 hours 0 minute 0 second) + (2 hours 42 minutes 0 second) 
	= 	10 hours 42 minutes A.M. 
Again, the difference of longitude between Dhaka and the second place is 50°30¢. 
So, the difference of time, 
	= 	(50 ° × 4) minutes + (30¢ × 4) seconds 
	= 	200 minutes + 120 seconds = 202 minutes 
	= 	3 hours 22 minutes. 
The second place is located towards west from Dhaka. Therefore, the local time of 
that place will be less, that means 3 hours 22 minutes will have to be deducted from the 
time of Dhaka. 
So, the local time of the place, 
	= 	(8 hours 0 minute 0 second) - (3 hours 22 minutes) 
	= 	4.38 A.M. = 4 hours 38 minutes A.M. 
Answer : 10 hours 42 minutes A.M. and 4 hours 38 minutes A.M. 
Question 2. The difference of time between Dhaka and Seoul is 2 hours 32 minutes. The 
longitude of Dhaka is 90° East and the local time is 6 hours 32 minutes in the morning. 
What will be local time and longitude of Seoul? 
Solution 
Seoul is the capital of South Korea, and is situated towards east from Dhaka. So, the local 
time of Seoul will be more than Dhaka. 
The local time of Dhaka is 6.32 A.M.
Latitude and Longitude	 17 
The local time of Seoul 	=	(6 hours 32 minutes) + (2 hours 32 minutes) 
	 	= 	8 hours 64 minutes 
	 	= 	9 hours 4 minutes 
	 	= 	9.04 A.M. 
	 	= 	9 hours 4 minutes A.M. 
Again the time difference between Dhaka and Seoul is 2 hours 32 minutes or 152 minutes. 
Difference of 4 minutes will make a longitudinal difference of 1° 
Difference of 1 minute will make a longitudinal difference = 
So, difference of 152 minutes will make a longitudinal difference =														 = 38° 
The longitude of Dhaka is 90° East. The longitude of Seoul will be more than Dhaka 
as it is situated towards east of Dhaka. 
So, the longitude of Seoul will be = 90° + 38° = 128° East. 
Answer : The local time of Seoul is 9 hours 4 minutes A.M. and the longitude of 
Seoul is 128°. 
Question 3. The Greenwich time is 20 minutes passed 7 A.M. If the time is the noon 
for any place, then determine the longitude of that place. 
Solution 
When the Greenwich time is 20 minutes passed 7 A.M. the local time of the particular 
place is 12 noon. The local time of the place is more than that of Greenwich. So, the 
place is located towards east of Greenwich, in effect it is located in the east longitude. 
The difference of time between these two places is 
	= 	(12 hours - 7 hours 20 minutes) 
	= 	4 hours 40 minutes = 280 minutes 
For every 4 minutes difference of time, the difference of longitude stands at 1°. 
Therefore, for every 1 minute difference of time, the difference of longitude will be 
So, for the difference of 280 minutes the longitudinal difference will be 													= 70° 
Therefore, the difference of longitude between Greenwich and that particular place 
will be 70° East. 
So, that result will be 70° East. 
Question 4. Dhaka is located at 90°26¢ East longitude and Karachi is situated at 67° 
East longitude. If the local time of Karachi is 10 A.M. what will be the local time of 
Dhaka. 
Solution 
The difference of longitude between Dhaka and Karachi is (90°26¢ East - 67° East) 
= 23°26¢ 
14
( (° 
° 
14
( ( 
1´ 152 ( ( 4 
° 
° 
1´ 280 ( ( 4
18	 Secondary Geography 
For one degree difference of longitude, the difference of time will be 4 minutes. And 
for 1 minute difference of longitude the difference of time will be 4 seconds. 
Therefore, the difference of time between Dhaka and Karachi is : 
	= 	(23 ° × 4) minutes + (26¢ × 4) seconds 
	= 	92 minutes + 104 seconds 
	= 	93 minutes + (1 minute + 44 seconds) = 93 minutes 44 seconds 
	= 	1 hour , 33 minutes and 44 seconds. 
Dhaka is situated towards east from Karachi. So, the local time of Dhaka will be more 
than that of Karachi. 
Local time of Karachi is 10 A.M. So, to determine the local time of Dhaka it requires 
to add 1 hour 33 minutes and 44 seconds with the local time of Karachi, that means, 
with 10 A.M. 
Therefore, local time of Dhaka will be : 
	= 	10 hours + 1 hour 33 minutes and 44 seconds 
	= 	11 hours 33 minutes and 44 seconds in the morning. 
Answer : The local time of Dhaka will be 11 hours 33 minutes and 44 seconds A.M. 
Question 5. The latitude and longitude of a place is 40° North and 55° East 
respectively. Ascertain the latitude and longitude of its antipode. 
Solution 
The latitude of a place and its antipode are the same but each of them is located in the 
opposite hemisphere. The latitude of the place in question is 40° North. So, the 
latitude of its antipode will be 40° South. The longitude of the antipode will be 
(180°- the longitude of the place). 
The longitude of the place in question is 55° East. 
Therefore, the longitude of the antipode will be (180°--55°) - 125°. So, the longitude 
of the antipode is 125° West. 
Answer : The latitude and the longitude of the antipode is 40° South and 120° West 
respectively. 
Latitude and Longitude 
What we learnt from this chapter : 
Equator : The imaginary line lying midway between the poles, which encircles the 
earth from west to east. 
The latitude : The angular distance of a point on the earthÕs surface north or south of 
the equator, as measured from the centre of the earth, is the latitude, of that place. 
The lines of longitude : The imaginary lines which are drawn from north pole to 
south pole through equator connecting each of the different points created by 
graduating the equator into degrees, minutes and seconds.
Latitude and Longitude	 19 
66 
1° 
23 
1
2 
0 
Declination : The day when the sun gives its rays vertically over a latitude is the 
declination of the sun for that day. 
The Prime Meridian : The Prime Meridian is the line that passes from north to south 
over Greenwich near London. 
The Local Time : Due to rotation of the earth on its axis when the sun reaches its 
highest position in the sky in some particular place, it is taken as noon-day and the 
time records as 12 O’ clock. This is accepted as the Local Time of the place and other 
time of the day is calculated from this local time. 
Standard Time : The time which is referred to the mean time of a certain meridian. 
Every country determines its time from the meantime of the meridian which passes 
through the middle of that country and this is known as Standard Time of that country. 
Antipode : A point on the earth surface is known as antipode of another point when it 
is situated just on the opposite side of the globe corresponding to that point. 
International Date Line : From any fixed place if any body crosses the 180° 
longitude he will observe that it creates problems to determine the day of the week 
along with the differences of local time. To avoid this anomaly depending on 180° 
longitude, an imaginary line is drawn from north to south exclusively over the waters. 
The imaginary line is known as the International Date Line. 
Exercise 
Multiple Choice Questions 
1. 	Dhaka is located at 90° east longitude and Bangalore is situated at 80° East 	 
longitude. If the local time of Dhaka is 12 noon what is the local time in 
Bangalore then? 
	a. 11:20 am 	b . 11:50 am 
	c. 12:00 noon 	d. 12:40 pm 
Use the figure below and answer question number 2 and 3. 
° 
° 
2 
23 
1
2
° 
66 
1
2
°
20	 Secondary Geography 
2. 	The line stands on 0° is called - 
	 a. Tropic of Cancer 	b . Tropic of Capricorn 
	c. Equator 	d. Axis 
3. 	By observing the figure we can get -- 
	 i.	 The axis encircles the north and south pole 
	ii. 	 The axis passes through the equator 
	iii. 	 The axis and the equator are parallel to each other 
	 Which one is correct below? 
	 a. i and ii 	b . ii and iii 
	c. i and iii 	d. i, ii and iii 
4. 	What is the correct place among the following over which the international 
imaginary date line has been drawn? 
	 a.	Through the landmass 	b . Over the water bodies 
	c. 	Belo w the earth’s surface 	d. Through the space 
Creative Questions 
1.	 Sadid reached in Dhaka Airport on 14th March Friday for flying to London. Their 
plane flew for London at 11 pm. When the plane landed in Heathrow Airport, 
Sadid found it was 1 am Saturday at the airport clock. But the watch he wore in 
his wrist showed him 7 am Saturday. 
a. 		What is the cause of the difference of time? 
b. 		Expla in what is the importance of Prime Meridian? 
c. 	What is the time in Greenwich when it is 11 hours 1 minute 44 seconds at night 
in Dhaka? If the longitude of London is 0° what is the longitude of Dhaka 
then? 
d. 	ÔThe longitude of a place can be determined by the method of Greenwich mean 
time’- give your opinion.