Chapter Three 
The Motion of the Earth 
Everyday the sun rises in the east and sets in the west. This process led many people 
in the past to think that the sun is moving and the earth is fixed. The sun moves 
around the earth. But with the advancement of science, this has been proved that the 
sun itself is moving and the earth has also motion. Later it has been revealed that the 
sun does not move around the earth, rather the earth moves around the sun. The earth 
not only moves around the sun, it also rotates on its own axis. The motion of the earth 
is of two types : (1) to rotate on its own axis, and (2) to revolve around the sun in its 
own orbit. The rotational motion of the earth is known as Diurnal motion and the 
revolutionary motion is called the annual motion. 
Diurnal Motion 
The earth has motion. Centering the sun, the earth moves from west to east on its axis. 
This motion of the earth is known as rotation. The earth takes 23 hours 56 minutes 
and 4 seconds or nearly 24 hours 
to rotate once on its axis. This 
period of 24 hours is regarded as 
one day. This diurnal movement 
of the earth is the rotation. One 
such full rotation of the earth is 
known as solar day. The earth 
takes a full day to complete 
rotation once on her axis. 
The speed of rotation is different 
in different places. The speed of 
rotation at the equator is highest. 
Here the speed of rotation is more 
than 1,610 kilometres per hour. 
This speed decreases towards 
north and south of the equator. 
The speed of the rotation is nearly 
zero at the poles. Though the 
diurnal motion exists, but still we 
donít feel due to the following 
reasons :	 
Fig. 9 : Material thrown from the top 
CENTRE OF THE EARTH 
ROTATE EASTWARD 
PLUMS LINE 
HORIZON 
EAST 
WEST
22	 Secondary Geography 
1. 	Compared to the size of the earth, we are very much insignificant, so we do not 
feel the speed. 
2. 	 No fixed or movable object is available in front of the earth in the space which can 
be taken as the basis to understand the rotational speed of the earth. 
3. 	 Keeping pace with the speed of the earth, the atmosphere also moves from west to 
east. So, we, do not feel the rotational speed of the earth. 
4. 	 The rotational speed of each of the places of the earth is fixed. 
Evidences of Diurnal Rotation 
In the old days Ptolemy and his follower astronomers used to think that the earth was 
motionless. But subsequently astronomers like Copernicus, Kepler, Galileo and 
Newton gave their opinions in favour of the rotation of the earth. 
1. Everyday the sun rises in the east and sets in the west. From this phenomenon we 
can infer that either the sun of the earth is moving. This motion is accomplished 
within one day or 24 hours. The sun is stationed about 15 crore kilometres away from 
the earth in the space. Being located at such a long distance, it is not possible for the 
sun to revolve round the earth within 24 hours. Moreover the tremendous speed the 
sun requires to move round the earth will be even more than the speed of the light, 
which is simply impossible. Because no object can move faster than light. So, it is not 
the sun but the earth which rotates on its own axis in 24 hours. 
2. The shape of the earth : The earth is inflated in the middle and is compressed 
towards the poles. If any pliable object or matter rotates around its axis, it acquires 
such a condition. The present shape of the earth is the result of such rotational speed. 
Scientist Newton had the opinion that due to the rotational motion, the earth acquired 
the present shape. 
3. Due to rotation of the earth, changes also occur in ocean currents and wind system. 
According to Ferrelís Law, it is due to the rotation of the earth that the air and the 
ocean currents are deflected to the right in the northern hemisphere and to the left in 
the southern hemisphere. 
4. It is observed that if a stone is thrown from a high place, it does not reach the gound 
vertically, rather it moves slightly towards the east. This proves that the earth rotates 
from west to east or the earth has rotational motion (Fig. 9). 
5. Primarily, tide occurs due to the attraction of the moon. The moon takes twenty 
seven days to complete one revolution around the earth. So, it is expected that the high 
tide would occur once every 27 days. But practically we observe that the high tide 
occurs every day which proves the rotational movement of the earth.
The Motion of the Earth	 23 
Fig. 10 : Foucault’s experiment 
6. French scientist Foucault, with the 
help of a pendulum proved the diurnal 
motion of the earth. He attached a pin 
at the bottom of the pendulum and 
hang it on the top of St. Pantheon 
church of Paris with a fixed motion, 
so that it would oscillate from north to 
south. Due to oscillation, the pin at 
the bottom of the pendulum started 
marking on the ground. Mr. Foucault 
observed that every time the marks 
have been deflected towards east. So, 
it can be proved that due to diurnal 
motion the earth rotates from west to 
east (Fig. 10).	 
Effects of Earthís Rotation 
1. Occurance of day and night : One of the effects of the earthís rotation is the occurance 
of day and night. We know that the 
earth is round and it does not have 
any light of its own. The earth 
becomes illuminated by the light of 
the sun. Due to diurnal motion, that 
part of the earth which faces the sun 
becomes illuminated. It is day in the 
illuminated portion of the earth. 
Sunlight does not reach the opposite 
part of the illuminated portion. So, 
it remains dark and it is night in the 
dark portion of the earth (Fig. 11). 
Due to rotation of the earth, alternately the illuminated portion becomes dark and the 
dark portion becomes illuminated and that is why the day and night are changed. 
When the dark portion is illuminated, it becomes day there. Similarly the illuminated 
portion turns dark, it becomes night there. Thus day and night have been occuring 
alternately. So, in some places it is 12 hours of day and 12 hours of night. 
If the shape of the earth would have been flat instead of being round, the rotation of the 
earth would create only day or only night. In other words, either only day or only night 
would exist simultaneously over the globe. On a specific date, in some parts of the 
earth it is day whereas in other parts it is night. That means when a portion of the earth 
Fig. 11 : Occurrance of day and night 
SUN RAYS 
SHADOW 
CIRCLE NOON 
EVENING 
MID NIGHT 
200 FEET LONG WIRE 
PENDULUM 
OSCILLATION 
a 
a 
b 
b 
c 
c 
d 
d 
e 
e 
MORNING
24	 Secondary Geography 
remains dark the other part becomes illuminated. The border of the lighted and the 
dark portion is called the shadow circle. Due to rotation, when the dark portion, after 
crossing the shadow circle faces the 
light, it is known as morning. The 
feeble light which precedes the morning 
is known as dawn and similarly the 
feeble light that precedes the evening is 
called twilight. In any place, when the 
sun reaches the highest elevation of the 
sky it is known as midday or noon and 
the time recorded is 12 Oí clock. But in 
the opposite point of that place it is 
midnight (Fig. 12). 
2. Temperature differences : It is due 
to the spherical shape and also for 
rotation that a comparatively small 
portion of the earth, located in the tropical areas between 23.5∞ North latitude to 
23.5∞ South latitude gets direct sunlight only for sometime of the year. The region 
where the sun gives its rays perpendicularly gets more heat. On the other hand, the 
areas located north and south of the region mentioned above get slanting rays and so 
these areas get less heat. 
3. Ocean currents, Tide and ebb and wind circulation : Diurnal motion of the earth 
creates rotational force which is responsible to change the direction of wind and ocean 
currents. So, as an effect of earth rotation, ocean current and the winds are deflected 
towards right in the northern hemisphere and towards left in the southern hemisphere. 
4. Determining the time : Due to rotation of the earth, it has become easier to 
calculate the time, since the period of one complete rotation of the earth can be 
divided into 24 parts and each of the parts can be calculated as an hour. Again the 
hour can be sub-divided to sixty divisions and the period of each of the divisions can 
be taken as a minute. Similarly, the minute can again be divided into sixty divisions 
taking each division as one second. 
5. Influence on nature and living creatures : If due to rotation of the earth, any 
change occurs in the field of temperature and light then such change influences the 
production, growth and character of living organisms. Had there been no diurnal 
motion some of the regions would remain ever dark and no plant could grow, while 
some other regions due to continuous sunshine would have been converted into desert. 
Fig. 12 : Different position of day-night 
4 P M 
2 P M 
12 NOON 
4 O' Clock 2 O' Clock 
12 O' Clock at night 
10 A.M 
10 A.M 
6 A.M 
6 A.M
8 P.M 
8 P.M 
30∞ 
0∞ 
30∞ 
60∞ 
90∞
120∞ 
150∞ 180∞ 
60∞ 
90∞ 
120∞ 
150∞ 
R ota tio n of the E a rt h 
Wes t E a s t
The Motion of the Earth	 25 
Annual Motion 
According to Newtonís Law of Gravitation, the planets move around the stars due to 
their attraction. A law is also applicable to the solar system. In solar system each of 
the planets moves round the sun. The earth being a planet of the solar system, also 
moves on an elliptical orbit round the sun. The earth having a full rotation on her axis 
for 24 hours, simultaneously moves around the sun on a set route i.e. orbit once in a 
year. This movement of the earth is known as the annual motion. The earth takes 365 
days 6 hours to revolve around the sun in her orbit. The period, the earth takes to 
complete the revolution is known as the solar year. 
The circumference of the earthís orbit is slightly more than 93 crore 80 lakhs and 827 
kilometres. The average speed of revolution is 1,06,260 kilometres per hour. In other 
words, the earth moves around the sun at a speed of 30 kilometres per second. 
Considering this speed, it requires 365 days 6 hours 48 minutes and 47 seconds to 
move round the sun for one time. But the solar year is calculated to be of 365 days. 
So, there remains a shortfall of about 24 hours or one day. To make up this deficit one 
extra day is added to the calendar in every fourth year. And that year is calculated as 
of 366 days. The month of February is calculated to be of 29 days instead of 28 days. 
This year is regarded as Leap Year and the leap year is taken to be of 366 days. 
Revolution of the earth is responsible to create fluctuation in the duration of day and 
night. It is also responsible to bring changes in the march of seasons. 
Effects of Annual Motion 
I. Fluctuation of day and night : The duration of the days and nights fluctuate in the 
same time in the different parts of the year due to the revolution of the earth. As a 
result, it is observed that in the same latitude, the length of day and night fluctuate in 
different periods of the year. 
In the process of revolutionary motion the earth, on 2lst June reaches in such a 
position that the sunís rays fall vertically on the northern most position of the earth, 
that means, on 23.5∞ North latitude or on the Tropic of Cancer. At this time, the 
northern hemisphere remains inclined more towards the sun and the southern 
hemisphere remains at the furthest distance from the sun. That is why the length of the 
day is greater and the temperature is higher in the northern hemisphere. So, 21st June 
is the longest day and shortest night in the northern hemisphere. The sun reaches its 
northern most limit on 21st June and the date is known as Summer Solstice. 
The sunshines vertically over the equator on 21st March and 23rd September. On these 
two dates, the sun remains in equal distance from the north and south poles. So, on 
these two dates, the duration of the day and night is equal (12 hours day and 12 hours 
night) over the entire world. The day when the day and night are equal over the globe, 
is known as the Equinoxes. 21st March is spring in northern hemisphere. So, 21st 
26	 Secondary Geography 
March is called the Vernal Equinox, and 23rd September is Autumn northern 
hemisphere, so 23rd September is known as Autumnal Equinox. 
The southern hemisphere shows maximum inclination towards the sun on 22nd 
December. So, on that date it is the longest day and the shortest night in the southern 
hemisphere. The sun reaches its southernmost position on this day and the date is 
known as the Winter Solstice. The sun gives its rays vertically over 23.5∞ South 
latitude or Tropic of Capricorn. 
Proofs of Annual Motion 
1. The apparent motion of the stars : As we cannot feel the occurence of earthís 
rotation, similarly we cannot perceive the existence of earthís revolution. But with the 
changing locations of the stars from east to west at night sky, we can comprehend that 
the earth has an annual motion or the revolution. By looking at the stars in a clear sky 
one can understand the gradual movement of the stars from east to west. 
2. The changing locations of the sun in the sky : The sun is seen to be located in 
different positions in different periods of the year. We can observe that on 21st March 
and 23rd September, the sun rises at a point due east on the horizon and sets at a point 
due west on the horizon. Again, we can see that on 21st June and 22nd December, the 
sun rises at north-eastern horizon and south-eastern horizon in the sky respectively. 
From 21st June to 23rd December, the sun seems to have an apparent motion towards 
south. This is known as southerly movement of the sun. Again from 22nd December to 
21st June, it seems that the sun is apparently moving towards north and this movement 
of the sun is known as northerly movement. 
3. The revolutionary motion of different planets : It has been observed through 
telescope that all the planets are revolving around the sun. The earth as a planet also 
has revolutionary speed or annual motion. 
4. Direct observation : Recently the spaceman from spaceship has observed the 
revolution of the earth. 
5. The Law of Gravitation : In comparison to the sun, the earth is very small. The 
sun is 13 lakh times greater than the earth. So, it is naturally thought that due to 
gravitation the earth moves round the sun. 
Change of Seasons 
The whole year is being divided into 4 divisions on the basis of the variation of 
temperature. Each of the divisions is known as a season. These are the Summer, the 
Autumn, the Winter and the Spring. It is to be noted here that when summer prevails 
in the northern hemisphere, winter sets in the southern hemisphere. Again, when there 
is winter in the northern hemisphere, it is summer in the southern hemisphere. 
Similarly, when it is spring in the northern hemisphere, it is autumn in the southern 
hemisphere and it is spring in the southern hemisphere when it is autumn in the 
northern hemisphere.
The Motion of the Earth	 27 
Reasons for change of seasons : Due to the difference of temperature, the clange of 
seasons does occur. The reasons for difference of temperature and as well as that of 
seasons are the following : 
1. Difference in solar heat; 
2. The earth is round. So, some places get direct sunshine, whereas in other places it 
falls at a slanting position. As a result, it creates difference in temperature which in 
turn causes to change the season. 
3. The orbit of the earth is elliptical. So the distance of the earth from the sun 
fluctuates. As a result, it creates difference in temperature which ultimately brings 
changes in season. 
4. The axis of the earth makes a fixed inclination of about 66.5∞ with the plane of the 
ecliptic. As a result, once in a year the north pole or the south pole shows inclination 
towards the sun. Temperature increases in the hemisphere when it remains inclined 
towards the sun and in opposite case the temperature decreases. As a result, the season 
changes. 
Perihelion and Aphelion : The orbit of the earth is an ellipse. Its length is 
93,80,51,827 kilometres. The sun is located in the centre or in the focus of the ellipse. 
Perihelion : In the process of revolution around the sun, the earth on 1st to 3rd January 
reaches in such a position that the distance between the sun and the earth becomes the 
lowest. It is about 14 crore 65 lakh 83 thousand 5 hundred kilometres. This position of 
the earth on that date is known as Perihelion. In Perihelion position the axis of the 
earth lie aslant outside the orbit (Fig. 13). 
Aphelion : As the orbit of the earth is ellipse, the distance between the sun and the 
earth does not remain fixed for all the time of the year. Sometimes the distance 
increases and other times it decreases. In the first half of July, particularly on 4th July, 
the distance between the sun and the earth becomes the highest being 15 crore 14 lakh 
20 thousand and 500 kilometres. This position of the earth is known as Aphelion. 
3rd JANUARY 
PERIHELION 
14,65,83,500 Km 15,14,20,500 Km 
4th JULY 
PLANE OF ORBIT 
THE ORBIT 
APHELION 
SUN 
Fig. 13 : Perihelion and Aphelion position
28	 Secondary Geography 
The process of changing of season : Normally, we know that there are four seasons in the 
earth viz., the summer, the autumn, the winter and the spring. Now we will try to 
understand how the changes of season do occur. The explanations for the change of seasons 
may be obtained from four situations of the earth during revolution around the sun. 
1. Summer in the Northern Hemisphere and Winter in the Southern Hemisphere : 
We know that the north pole comes nearer to the sun once in a year. During revolution 
on her orbit, the north pole of the earth after 21st March, starts showing inclination 
towards the sun. Consequently, a large portion of the northern hemisphere is being 
illuminated by the rays of the sun. The area of illumination gradually increases. As a 
result, the days become longer and the nights shorter in the northern hemisphere. As the 
days become longer the sun gives its rays for a longer time in the northern hemisphere. 
The earth gets more time to receive heat and the heated earth in turn makes the 
surrounding air to be hot. Nights are short and the amount of radiation from the soil is 
less in comparison to the amount of heat that is stored during day time. Thus hot 
weather prevails in the northern hemisphere and so it is summer there. 
At this time opposite condition prevails in the southern hemisphere. Since the 
southern hemisphere remains far from the sun and it gets sunshine for a shorter time. 
So the nights are long and the days are short. The earth radiates the heat which she has 
stored at day time. As a result, the earth becomes cold. Cold weather prevails in the 
southern hemisphere and it is winter there. 
2. Autumn in the Northern Hemisphere and Spring in the Southern Hemisphere : 
After 21st June, the length of the day starts decreasing and the length of night gets 
increasing in the northern hemisphere. But until 23rd September in comparison to night, 
the length of the day still remains shorter. The north pole which is inclined towards the sun 
starts moving away from the sun and from a distant position the southern hemisphere 
gradually inclined towards the sun i.e. the south polar region comes nearer to the sun. 
Consequently temperature gradually decreases in the northern hemisphere and it increases 
in the southern hemisphere. This condition is known as Autumn in the northern 
hemisphere and Spring in the southern hemisphere. On 23rd September the day and night 
are equal throughout the world (Fig. 14). 
Fig. 14 : Revolution of earth-fluctuation of day and night-change of season 
W
The Motion of the Earth	 29 
ï3. Winter in the Northern Hemisphere and Summer in the Southern Hemisphere : 
We know that after 23rd September, the southern hemisphere starts showing 
inclination towards the sun. One can perceive that everyday the sun moves southward. 
This is known as southwardly movement of the sun. In comparison to night, the days 
become longer in the southern hemisphere as the south pole shows inclination towards 
the sun. As the sunís rays fall directly on the Tropic of Capricorn, the southern 
hemisphere gets sun rays for a longer period of time. Consequently, the temperature 
increases in the southern hemisphere. On 22nd December, the south pole approaches to 
the nearest position towards the sun and it is the longest day in the southern 
hemisphere. So, one and half months preceding 22nd December and the same period 
following that date the temperature remains high in the southern hemisphere. 
Naturally, during this period, the temperature remains very low in the northern 
hemisphere. So, one and half months preceding 22nd December, it is summer in the 
southern hemisphere and it is winter in the northern hemisphere. 
Fig. 15 : Main seasons 
4. Spring in the Northern Hemisphere and Autumn in the Southern Hemisphere : 
The sun starts moving towards the north after 22nd December. The length of the day 
starts decreasing in the southern hemisphere and increasing in the northern hemisphere. 
Consequently, the temperature increases gradually in the northern hemisphere and 
decreases in the southern hemisphere. Again day and night become equal in duration on 
21st March. On this date the sun,s position is vertical on the equator. This is known as 
autumnal equinox. This is spring in the northern hemisphere and autumn in the southern 
hemisphere (Fig. 15).
30	 Secondary Geography 
The Motion of the Eearth 
What we learnt from this chapter : 
Diurnal motion : The earth rotates on its own axis once in 24 hours or in a day. This 
motion of the earth is called the diurnal motion. The diurnal motion causes the 
occurance of days and nights and the variation of temperature, whereas, this motion 
controls the ocean currents, tide and ebb and the wind movements. 
Annual motion : The earth revolves round the sun on a fixed orbit once in a year. 
This motion of the earth is called the annual motion. The fluctuation in the duration of 
the days and nights and the changes of seasons do occur due to this annual motion. 
Seasons : The whole year has been divided into four divisions. Each of such division 
is known as a season. There are four seasons viz., summer, Autumn, winter and 
spring. 
Change of seasons : The change of seasons occurs mainly due to the variation of 
temperature. Difference in temperature of the sun, the round shape of the earth, the 
rotation of the earth etc. are the causes of the change of season. 
Perihelion and Aphelion : The earth, on 1st to 3rd January, is positioned at a shortest 
distance from the sun and this of the earth is known as Perihelion. Again, the earth on 
1st to 4th July, remains at the furthest distance from the sun and such position of the 
earth is known as Aphelion. 
Exercise 
Multiple Choice Questions 
1. 	Where is the diurnal motion of the earth is nearly zero? 
	i. 	In the north pole 	 
	ii. 	In the south pole 
	iii. 	In the equator 
	 Which one is correct below? 
	a. i and ii 	b . ii and iii 
	c. i and iii 	d. i, ii and iii 
	
Answer question number 2-4 as per the figure.
The Motion of the Earth	 31 
2. 	What does the given figure represent? 
	 a. 	The change of season 	 	b. The occurrence of the day and night 
	c. 	The fluctuation of the day and night 	d. The rotation of the earth 
3. 	In the North and South Pole of the earth -- 
	 a. 	The day and night is equal 
	b . 	The fluctuation of the day and night is very little 
	c. 	Six months night at a stress 
	d. 	The differences of temperature of day and night 
4. 	Which is the date known as autumnal equinox? 
	 a. 21st March 	b . 21st June 	 
	c. 23 rd September 	d. 21 st December 
Creative Questions 
1. 	Answer the questions using the figure below. 
	
	 
	
	a. 	What is the figure about above? 
	b . 	Why it is the longest day in the Southern Hemisphere on 22nd December? 
	 c. 	Prove the annual motion of the earth from 4 different points of the given figure. 
	 d.	 Explain what role does the change of season play in Bangladesh agricultural 	 
	 	sector? 
22nd December 21st June
32	 Secondary Geography 
Part Two 
Physical Geography 
Introduction 
The landforms created by the different geographic processes under different 
environments on the earthís surface are included in the physical geography. The 
subject matter of physical geography can be divided into three major divisions viz., 
lithosphere, atmosphere, and hydrosphere. Though each of these divisions possesses 
individual qualities, yet they are interrelated. Besides, they collectively maintain the 
biosphere. The lithosphere, atmosphere and hydrosphere are interlinked with each 
other and the biosphere has been developed based on the elements taken from them 
(Fig. 16). Let us cite an example. The people is using lithosphere for agriculture 
depending on the river water or reserviors (part of the hydrosphere). Again, solar heat 
is needed (part of the atmosphere) to increase the agricultural production. The 
lithosphere, atmosphere, and hydrosphere are discussed respectively. 
Fig. 16 : Relation of organic and inorganic spheres 
ATMOSPHERE 
HYDROSPHERE LITHOSPHERE 
BIOSPHERE 
EARTH
Chapter One 
Lithosphere 
Earthís crust and the interior of the earth : The earth is almost like a sphere. Its 
radius is about 6,400 kilometres. There is no scope to observe the interior of the earth 
by piercing the hard external covering. The geologists by observing the characteristics 
of the seismic waves, gravitation and the characteristics of the magnetic field have 
developed some idea about the elements and structure of the earthís interior. 
Depending on the worldwide collected information, the earth from the surface to the 
centre has been divided into three strata. These are (a) the earthís crust, (b) barysphere 
and (c) centrosphere. 
(a) The earthís crust : The hard stratum of the rock covering the outer shell of the whole 
earth is known as the earthís crust (Fig. 17). The thickness of the earthís crust is the lowest in 
comparison to the other interior layers of the earth. On an average, it is about 20 kilometres. 
The thickness of the earthís crust on 
an average is about 35 kilometres 
beneath the continents and only 5 
kilometres beneath the ocean. 
Generally, the continental earthís 
crust is known as SIAL which is 
composed of Silicon (Si) and of 
Aluminium (Al). On the other hand, 
the earthís crust beneath the ocean is 
composed of basalt which is heavier 
than that of Sial layer and its major 
elements are Silicon (Si) and 
Magnesium (Mg) and is generally 
known as SIMA. It is inferred that 
probably this basalt stratum has been 
existing throughout the world as a coating beneath the Sial and in the bottom of the 
seas and oceans. The temperature beneath the earthís crust increased by 30∞ Celsius 
for every kilometre of depth. 
(b) Barysphere : The stratum beneath the earthís crust is the barysphere. But, there is 
a thin layer between the earthís crust and the barysphere. The Yogoslavian 
Seismographer Mohorovicic in 1909 first discovered this layer of seperation. So, the 
layer has been known as Mohorovicic Discontinuity. The layer of barysphere is 2,885 
kilometres thick which is extended from Mohorovicic upto the outskirts of the 
Fig. 17 : The cross section of the formation of earthís interior 
Source : Trabuck and Lutgens (1994)
34	 Secondary Geography 
centrosphere (Fig. 18). The rocks of the upper part of the centrosphere are hard and 
brittle and this layer is about 100 kilometres deep. The earthís crust and the upper part 
of the barysphere is 100 kilometres thick and this collectively known as rocksphere or 
lithosphere. 
Fig. 18 : Asthenosphere, lithosphere and mohorovicic discontinuity 
The rocks beneath the hard layer of barysphere being close to the melting point are 
partially soft and this layer extends downwards for about 300 kilometres. This layer is 
known as Asthenosphere. This hard layer of rock can move slowly over the 
Asthenosphere. The upper part of the barysphere is made of silicate which is primarily 
composed of iron and magnesium. It is assumed that the lower part of the barysphere 
(700 to 2,885 kilometres) is constituted of the minerals composed of complete mixture 
of iron oxide (FeO), Magnesium Oxide (MgO) and the Silicon dioxide (SiO2). The 
temperature of the barysphere at 100 kilometres depth ranges from about 1,100∞ 
Celsius to 1,200∞ Celsius which increases to 1,900∞ Celsius at a depth of 700 
kilometres and to 3,000∞ Celsius at the outskirts of the centrosphere. 
(c) Centrosphere : The centrosphere is a layer which is extended from the lower part 
of the barysphere upto the centre of the earth. The thickness of this layer is about 3,486 
kilometres (Fig.17). The centrosphere occupies about 16 per cent of the total area of 
the earth and its weight is about one-third of the total weight of the earth. The pressure 
of this layer is several lakh times more than the air pressure and the temperature ranges 
from 3,000∞ Celsius to 5,000∞ Celsius. It is learnt from the siesmic waves that the 
centrosphere has a liquid cover which is about 2,770 kilometres thick and has also a 
Earth crust beneath 
the oceans 
DEPTH 
IN KM. 
Upper Barysphere 
Lithosphere 
Asthenos phere 
Partially in Melting Condition 
Pliable Barysphere 
Mohorovicic, Discontinuity 
Continental Earth Crust
Lithosphere	 35 
hard inner cover which is about 1,216 kilometres thick. The major two elements of the 
centrosphere is Ferror (Fe) and Nickel (Ni) which is combinedly known as NiFe. 
Lithosphere 
What we learnt from this chapter : 
Earthís crust and the interior of the earth : The earthís crust and the interior of the 
earth can be divided into three divisions according to their mode of formation. These 
are (a) Earthís crust on Lithosphere, (b) Barysphere and (c) Centrosphere. 
Earthís crust : The thickness of the earthís crust beneath the continent, on an average 
is 35 kilometres and beneath the ocean it is 5 kilometres. The upper layer of the 
earthís crust is S1AL. The continents are primarily made of Sial rock. 
Barysphere and Lithosphere : The bottom layer of the earthís crust is barysphere. 
This layer is about 2,885 kilometres thick. The earthís crust and the upper part of the 
barysphere upto 100 kilometres is collectively known as rocksphere or lithosphere. 
Centrosphere : The layer extending from the lower part of the barysphere upto the 
centre of the earth is known as Centrosphere. This layer is about 3,480 kilometres 
thick. 
Exercise 
Multiple Choice Questions 
Observe the figure below and answer the questions from 1 to 4. 
1. 	Which one is accepted on the basis of the living of plants and animals 
according to the figure? 
	 a. The difference among lithosphere, atmosphere and hydrosphere 
	b . The lithosphere is combined with hydrosphere 
	c. Atmosphere is combined with hydrosphere 
	d. Lithosphere, atmosphere and h ydrosphere are together connected 
Hydrosphere 
Lithosphere Atmosphere
36	 Secondary Geography 
2.	 In the figure it is shown that lithosphere, atmosphere and hydrosphere has a 		 
common factor ( ingredient) and that is -- 
	a. Oxygen 	b . Nitrogen 
	c. Iron 	d. Nick el 
3. What is the temperature beneath the Earthís Crust increased for every 		 
kilometre of depth? 
	a. 30 ∞ 	b . 40∞ 
	c. 50 ∞ 	d. 60 ∞ 
4. 	In the Centre of the Earth, there is -- 
	i. Centrosphere 
	ii. Iron and nick el 
	iii. Hea vy temperature 
	 Which one is correct below? 
	a. i and ii 	b . ii and iii 
	c. i and iii 	d. i, ii and iii 
Creative Questions 
1.	 The earth has been created from the Sun. A separate part of the sun has radiated to 
take the present shape of the earth with the change of time. The temperature of the 
interior part of the earth is near to the temperature of the sun. But its external cover 
becomes cold and hard with the change of time. There is a difference scene in the 
structures as well as ingredients from the earth to the centre of the earth. 
	a. 	What is Earthís Crust? 
	b . 	Why does the Earthís Crust take hard shape? 
	c. 	Draw and show the structural differences from the Earth to the Centre of the 				 
Earth. 
	d. 	Why does the ingredients of various layers of the earth to the centre of the earth 
are different-- explain.
Lithosphere	 37 
Rocks and Minerals 
The outer cover of the earthís surface is known as the earthís crust. The earthís crust is 
basically formed of the rocks composed of different minerals. These earth forming 
minerals serve out different purposes. As for example, mineral oil and coal are used as 
fuel. Moreover, the economic use of gold, copper, zinc, aluminium, nickel, iron etc. is 
also very much important. 
Different land forming processes like volcanism, depositional and erosional activities 
are highly influenced by the structure of the rocks and minerals. It is necessary to 
acquire some knowledge about minerals and rocks being the elements responsible for 
formimg the earthís crust. 
First let us see what is meant by minerals? What is the difference between rocks and 
minerals? 
Minerals are formed by the composition of two or more basic elements. However, 
some minerals may be formed of one basic element. Diamond, gold, copper, silver, 
mercury and sulphur may be cited as examples. Of all these, the hardness of diamond 
is highest and of talc is lowest. 
On the other hand, the rocks are formed by the mixture of one or more minerals. Here, 
we mention the term mixture because in nature the minerals are found in mixed 
condition. Each of the rock forming minerals maintains its characteristic. Though 
much of the rocks are formed of more than one mineral, but in such case, the minerals 
and rocks are the same. As for example, calcite is a mineral while it is known as 
limestone as a rock. The characteristics of minerals are controlled by nature of the 
basic elements forming them. On the other hand, the property of rocks are regulated 
by the nature of the minerals constituting them. 
The rock family : The rocks are of three types according to their mode of origin. 
These are igneous, sedimentary and metamorphic rocks. Igneous and metamorphic 
rocks are formed by the processes accomplished in the interior of the earth. On the 
other hand, the sedimentary rocks are formed by the processes acting on the surface of 
the earth. Though the mode of formation of these rocks are different, yet they are 
interrelated. 
Igneous rocks : Igneous rocks can be formed under two environmental conditions 
viz., intrusive and extrusive. In the deep interior of the earth due to cooling, magma 
may be crystallized to form intrusive rock. If the magma finds its way to the surface of 
the earth through the vents, then it is termed as lava. This lava after cooling becomes 
extrusive rock (chart 1).
38	 Secondary Geography 
Intrusive rocks are sub-divided into plutonic and hypabyssal. Extrusive rocks are 
again sub-divided into explosive and quiet type. In intrusive type of rock, the magma 
solidifies in the deep interior of the earth. Granite, gabro, syenite, diorite etc. are the 
examples of intrusive rocks. In hypabyssal type, the magma solidifies in the shallow 
interior as Porphyry. 
Magma when thrown by violent explosions into the air after being solidified gives 
birth to the explosive Igneous rocks. Tuff and breccia may be cited as examples. In the 
quite type of igneous rock, the molten magma flows out quitely in all directions and 
solidifies. Rhyolite, basalt, andesite etc. are best examples of this type of rock. 
Fig. 19 : Landforms created by igneous rock 
Batholiths, Laccoliths, Dikes, and sills are the examples of the igneous rock formed 
into the interior of the earth (Fig. 19). 
Sedimentary rocks : The rocks which are formed by the deposition of sediments are 
known as sedimentary rocks. In this type of rock, the sediments are deposited in 
layers or strata. Sedimentary rocks cover an area of 5 per cent of the total area of the 
earthís crust. However, about 75 per cent of the total exposed part of the continental 
landmass is formed of sedimentary rocks. 
Sources of sediments and their characteristics : Different types of mechanical and 
chemical weathering processes are acting on the earthís crust. Due to the effect of 
these processes, the outer crust of the earth gradually erodes out. These eroded 
Igneous Rock 
Intrusive Extrusive 
Plutonic Hypabyssal Explosive Quiet 

Lithosphere	 39 
Mechanically formed (Accumulations 
of detritus by mechanical processes) 
Grains of normal 
size or larger 
Sand 
Silt 
Clay 
Pebbles 
Sandstone 
Clay rocks 
Shale 
Sources 	 	 	 Elements of sediments Names of the rock 
Chemically formed (accumulation of 
sediments by chemical processes) 
Calcite 
Dolomite 
Helite 
Gypsum 
Limestone 
Dolomite 
Salt 
Gypsum 
Organically formed Lime 
Silicon dioxide 
type diatom 
Plant materials 
Limestone, 
Chalk, 
Cocina 
Diatom 
Coal 
materials are known as sediments. The sediments which are formed by detrital created 
by the mechanical weathering is known as clastic sedimentary rocks. Clay, sandstone 
and pebbles are the examples of clastic sedimentary rocks. Sedimentary rocks which 
originate from the sediment accumulated by the chemical weathering is known as 
organic sedimentary rock. In this process, the materials which remain in soluble 
condition in the water gradually settle down at the bottom by different inorganic 
processes and ultimately become consolidated. For example, if evaporation occurs in 
any confined sea water, then the salts remain as residue. In this case, evaporation is an 
inorganic process and the salt that remains as residue is considered to be sediments. In 
some cases, the dead bodies of different acquatic animals are accumulated as organic 
sediments and ultimately these are consolidated and transformed into organic 
sedimentary rocks. Coal, limestone are the proper examples of such rock. Besides, 
dolomite, chert and gypsum are the examples of chemical sedimentary rocks. 
Classification of sedimentary rock : Primarily, the sedimentary rock is of three types 
viz., mechanical, chemical and organic. The names of sedimentary rocks with their 
elements is shown in Table 1. 
Table I : Sources, elements and the associated names of the sedimentary rocks 
	

40	 Secondary Geography 
Characteristics of sedimentary rocks : Bedding, ripple marks, clay, cracks etc. are 
found in the sedimentary rocks 
(Fig. 20). The presence of fossils is one 
of the major characteristics of the 
sedimentary rock. 
Metamorphic rocks : The rocks which 
through temperature, compression and 
chemical actions have been changed 
either in form or in composition is 
known as metamorphic rocks. 
																																																																													 Fig. 20 : Bedding of sedimentary rocks 
The agents of metamorphism : Heat, compression and chemically active fluids are 
the main agents who work singly or collectively to transform rocks. These 
metamorphic media increase the internal density of the rocks and the dimension of the 
crystals and create clear foliation. Due to the application of temperature and pressure, 
the minerals of the rock become compressed like the leaves of trees and are arranged 
in parallel layers. This characteristics of layered structure of rocks is called foliation 
(Fig. 21). 
		 
Fig. 21 : Formation of foliation 
Examples of the important metamorphic rocks : 
Rocks with foliation 
Slate : Slate is produced from shale. This type of rock contains very fine crystals 
which are mainly formed by small plates created from mica. Slate is used to produce 
writing slates, blackboards etc. 
LIMESTONE 
PLANE OF BEDDING 
RIPPLE MARK 
CLAY STRATA 
SEDIMENT 
SAND 
ORGANIC SEDIMENTS (COAL) 
Pre-Foliation Stage Shape after Foliation 
Pressure
Lithosphere	 41 
Non-foliated rocks 
Marble : It is a coarse grained crystalized rock which has been formed from 
limestone or dolomite. 
Quartzite : It is a very hard metamorphic rock which is mainly created from sandstone. 
Rocks 
What we learnt from this chapter : 
Rocks are divided into three types according to their mode of origin, viz. (1) Igneous 
rocks, (2) Sedimentary rocks, and (3) Metamorphic rocks. 
The hot viscous type of matters in the interior of the earth is known as magma and if it 
finds its way to the surface of the earth, it is called lava. 
Igneous rocks : Igneous rocks are formed by cooling of magma. Landforms created 
by igneous rocks have diversified characteristics. Dikes, sills, laccoliths and batholiths 
may be cited as examples. 
Sedimentary rocks : Rocks which are formed by the accumulation of sediments is 
known as sedimentary rocks. In this type of rock, the sediments are accumulated in 
layers. Limestone, coral and gypsum are the examples of sedimentary rocks. 
Metamorphic rocks : Due to temperature, compression and chemical actions, the 
elements and structure of the minerals of a rock are changed and transformed to a new 
type of rock which is known as metamorphic rock. Igneous and sedimentary through 
changes are transformed to metamorphic rocks. 
Slate : Slate is formed from shale. It is used to produce writing slates and 
blackboards. 
Marble : It is a coarser grained crystalline rock which is created from limestone and 
dolomite. 
Quartzite : It is a very hard metamorphic rock. Primarily, it is formed of sandstone. 
Exercise 
Multiple Choice Questions 
1. 	Which one is the Sedimentary Rock formed organically? 
	a. Clay and sandstone 	b . Coal and limestone 
	c. Dolomite and gypsum 	d. Calcite and nick el 
2. 	What kind of rock the Slate is? 
	a. Igneous 	b . Sedimentary 
	c. Metamorphic 	d. Non-crystalline
42	 Secondary Geography 
Notice about the figure below and answer question number 3 and 4. 
	
3. 	What is the name of the rock shown in point ‘Aí in the figure? 
	a. Extrusi ve 	b . Sedimentary 
	c. Metamorphic 	d. Hypabyssal 
4.	‘Magmaí is -- 
	i. Plutonic rock 
	ii. Hypabyssal rock 
	iii. Extrusi ve rock 
	Which one is corr ect below? 
	a. i 	b . ii 
	c. iii 	d. i, ii and iii 
Creative Questions 
1. 		While Tamanna was on a visit to Rupsha Bridge she asked her friend Happy to tell 
her what the ingredients of Rupsha Bridge are? In reply, Happy said, it is build of 
cement. In her evasive question Tamanna enquire of the ingredients of cement. In 
response to this question, Happy told that cement is made of limestone and it is a 
kind of rock. 
	a. 	What kind of rock is limestone? 
	b . 	How is this kind of rock formed? 
	c. 	Find out the diference between the limestone, which is used to prepare cement 	 
	 	and the metamorphic rock? 
	d. 	‘The structural formation of the sedimentary rock is always alive’ give reasons 	 
	 	for your answer . 
Extrusive Igneous Rocks 
Intrusive Igneous Rocks 
A 
Plutonic 
Earth’s Surface 
Explusive Type 
Quiet Type 
Lithosphere	 43 
Changes of the Earthís Crust 
Diastrophism 
The earthís crust is ever changing. Different landforming processes are responsible to 
bring changes. Landforming processes are the activities by which the changes are 
accomplished naturally in the formation of the land. For example, a river is building a 
flood plain through deposition. So, the depositional activities of a river is a 
landforming process. The landforming processes are accomplished with the help of 
different physical agencies or forces such as the gravitational forces, interior 
temperature and the solar energy. The different landforming processes with the help of 
the aforesaid agents bring changes on the earthís crust either slowly or rapidly. 
Generally, the landforming processes are associated with external forces. The changes 
brought about on the earthís surface takes a longer period of time, so this type, of 
changes is known as slow changes. The slow changes are accomplished in two 
processes. 
Denudation : It means to make the things exposed. The processes by which the rocks 
on the earthís surface are broken into pieces through the application of external 
physical forces and the debris are transported elsewhere is known as denudation. This 
denudation work is performed through three processes such as weathering, erosion 
and transportation. 
Weathering : The weathering is a process by which the rocks on the surface of the 
earth is broken mechanically into pieces due to snow or frost, the variation of 
temperature and pressure or due to chemical (dissolution) action on the materials. 
Even the rocks are dislodged by the animals. But the rocks weathered this way, are not 
transported elsewhere. 
Erosion : Erosion and transportation are accomplished together. The process by 
which the rocks of the earthís crust are eroded by the river, wind, glacier, ocean 
currents etc. and the eroded materials are transported elsewhere is known as erosion. 
On the other hand, the rapid changes are brought about on the earthís surface by the 
landforming processes associated with the internal forces. The changes brought about 
on the earthís crust by the landforming processes are shown in a figure below : 
According to this figure, the earthquake and the volcanism are mentionable of the 
rapid and sudden forces responsible for the changes on the earthís surface.
44	 Secondary Geography 
Landforming Processes 
Slow changes Slow and sudden changes Sudden changes 
Denudation Deposition Diastrophism Earthquake Volcanism 
Weathering Erosion Transportation 
1. Earthquake : An earthquake is a vibration or oscillation of the surface of the earth 
caused by sudden release of enormous pressure. If a stone is thrown in the quite water 
of a pond, it will create ripples in the water which will scatter all around 
the pond. Sudden release of enormous 
pressure from the interior of the earth, 
creates waves in the surrounding rock like 
the waves in water which also scatter all 
around. The point where the energy is 
released is known as the centre. The point 
just vertically above the point of origin is 
known as Epicentre (Fig.22). Seismography 
is used to measure the intensity of the 
earthquake waves. 
Types of earthquakes : Normally, an earthquake originates between 5 to 1,126 
kilometres deep into the interior of the earth. The earthquake centre has been 
classified into three classes according to their depth. These are : 
Shallow : The earthquake originating at a depth of 60 kilometres is termed as shallow 
earthquake. 
Intermediate : The earthquake originating at a depth of 60 to 300 kilometres is 
known as Intermediate. 
Deep : The earthquake originating at a depth of 300 kilometres and above is known as 
deep earthquake. 
About 90 per cent of the earthquakes that occur throughout the year over the world 
originate within less than 100 kilometres of depth. The terrible earthquakes which 
occured so far over the world are mostly of shallow type. 
Causes of earthquake : The geologists opine that sudden tectonic actions in the 
faultline or along the cracks are responsible to create earthquake. Besides, sudden 
ejection of lava with great force can also produce earthquakes. Radiation of heat from 
the earthís surface causes shrinkage which in turn to maintain equilibrium, develops 
cracks along the faultline or folds and the earthquake is caused. The rocks if dislodged 
due to earth movement or development of faults will also cause the earthquake. 
Fig. 22 : Focus and epicentre of earthquake
Lithosphere	 45 
Strength of earthquake : The energy of earthquake means the amount of strength 
which is scattered from the earthquake centre in all directions. Charles F. R. Richter, a 
seismologist first introduced an arithmetic scale to measure the intensity of seismic 
waves. The scale is known as the ‘Richter scaleí. 
Earthquake Prone Areas or Belts 
From fig. 23, it can be realised that the severity of earthquake is not equal throughout 
the world. Earthquakes mostly occur in the comparatively smaller areas which are 
long and narrow in size. Among them, the most noteworthy areas are the circular 
islands (Philippines and Japan), young fold mountains and ocean ridges. According to 
fig. 23, the earthquake prone areas can be divided into three principal zones : 
(a) The Pacific Zone : Maximum number of earthquakes occur along the outer border 
of the Pacific Ocean. Japan, the Philippines, Chile, Aleutian islands and Alaska have 
been identified as the most earthquake prone areas. 
(b) The Mediterranean and the Himalayan Zone : This region extends from the 
Alps to New Zealand covering Caucasus, Iran, the Himalaya, Indo-China and East 
Indies following the northern coast of the Mediterranean Sea. 
(c) Ridges of the Mid-Atlantic and the Indian Ocean : The north-south ridges of 
the Mid-Atlantic Ocean meeting with the ridges of the Indian Ocean extends upto the 
Mediterranean zone through the Red Sea. 
Besides these three specified belts, there are some areas located seperately within the 
continents and in the deeps of the oceans where the occurrence of the earthquake is felt. 
Fig. 23 : Distribution of earthquake prone areas 
0 1000 2000 km
46	 Secondary Geography 
Fig. 24 : Volcano 
Effects of earthquakes : Earthquake is accepted as a natural calamity. Most of the 
times, it causes great loss of lives and wealth in some parts of the earth. 
Generally, it may be mentioned that the devastative nature of earthquakes brings the 
following damages and changes in the earthís crust. 
(a) Faults, cracks or landslides occur in the earthís crust due to the earthquake. The 
course of the rivers is also changed. For example, the bed of the Brahmaputra river 
was raised and the river changed its original course and started flowing through the 
channel of the Jamuna due to the earthquake of Assam in 1787. 
(b) Earthquake, if it occurs in a thickly populated area, then causes great devastation 
to houses, roads and railways, water and gas supply line and other properties of the 
area. Moreover, if the area is a hilly one, then the landslides and mud flow create 
devastation to the settlements located at the foot of the mountains. 
(c) Earthquake that originates in the ocean floor create tremendous waves on the 
surface of water. Waves thus created by earthquakes are known as Tsunamis. 
Tsunamis bring sudden flood in towns and other localities in coastal areas. 
2. Eruption : Eruption is one of the major forces or processes bringing changes on 
the surface of the earth. Eruption of the volcanoes or the magma is the main sources 
of igneous rocks on the surface of the earth. Volcanoes, by dint of their internal energy 
produce different landforms which are known as initial configuration of the land. 
Different weathering agents start erosion on these initial landforms with various 
external forces and such areas are gradually transformed into plain lands. Thus it can 
be noted that there are continuous attempts to maintain equilibrium between the 
internal and the external forces. 
Volcanoes 
Extreme temperature released from 
the radioactive minerals in the interior 
of the earth cause the rocks of the 
lower part of lithosphere to melt. This 
melted rock finds its way to the earthís 
crust through the cracks or weak 
points. This erupted materials is 
known as Lava, gradually accumulated 
surrounding the vent and creates a 
high landform which is called Volcano 
(Fig. 24). 
On the crest of the volcano, there is a 
forepart with vertical slopes which is 
known as crater. This crater through a	 

Lithosphere	 47 
tunnel is linked with the magma in the interior of the earth. Sometimes the molten 
materials instead of ejecting out may be solidified inside. After ejection, the crater 
collapses creating a hole which is known as caldera. Crater lake of Oregon State of the 
United States of America is a Caldera. The volcanoes which eject lava from time to 
time are active volcanoes. At present, there are about 850 active volcanoes in the 
world. The volcanoes where volcanism remains suspended for a certain period of time 
are known as dormant and where the volcanic eruption has stopped permanently are 
known as extinct volcanoes. 
Erupted materials : Large number of rock fragments, volcanic dust and fine volcanic 
ashes are ejected with the lava. Besides, large amount of gaseous materials is also 
ejected. In the ejection process, firstly comes the basaltic lava followed by the 
andesite lava and lastly the rock fragments. 
Types of volcanoes : Though the nature of each volcanic eruption is quiet different, 
but the specialists on the basis of shape, size and eruptive nature have divided the 
volcanoes in three different types as Shield Volcano, Cinder Cone and the Mixed 
Cone. 
Shield volcanoes : This type of volcanoes is mainly constituted of basaltic lava. 
Mauna Loa and Kilauea of the Hawaii Islands are the best examples of this type of 
volcano. Mauna Loa is 5,000 metres wide beneath the ocean and it rises to 4,170 
metres above the ocean (Fig. 25). 
Fig. 25 : Shield volcano 
Cinder Cone : This type of volcano is created by rock fragments and lava. Parcutin 
and Mount Helena of Mexico are the proper examples of this type of Volcano. 
Mixed Cone : This type of volcano is created mainly by andesite lava which is fluid 
type with more viscous components. Hard rock fragments, volcanic dust, volcanic 
ashes and the heated gas are thrown with violent explosions and are accumulated near 

48	 Secondary Geography 
the crater and the viscous lava accumulates above them. Mount Maon of the Philippines 
and the Fujiama of Japan are the examples of this type of volcanoes (Fig. 26). 
Fig. 26 : Cinder and mixed cone volcanoes 
Volcano Prone Areas : The location of the active volcanoes have been shown in fig. 
27. Almost all the volcanoes are located along the border of the continents and the 
oceans. The main belt stretches from New Zealand in the Pacific to the southern tip of 
South America covering the Philippines, Japan, Alaska and the western coast of North 
America and this belt is known as Fiery Ring. Out of 850 active volcanoes of the 
world, this belt simply accounts for 75 per cent of the total. Moreover, traces of 
volcanic activities are also manifested in the submarine ridges of the oceans. For 
example, the landforming activities in the submarine ridges of Mid-Atlantic are still 
active. 
Fig. 27 : Distribution of active volcanoes 
Intrusive Rock 
(Strata) 
A Cinder Cone 
Mixed Cone 
Intrusive Rock 
(Strata) 
Crater
Tunnel 
Dike 
Crater 
Lava Flow 
B 
VOLGANOES 
120∞
Effects of volcanism : Volcanic eruptions and heavy lava flow are a kind of natural 
calamity which causes heavy damages to the living creatures and different human 
activities. In the past, many towns and settlements were destroyed by lava flows and 
thousands of people died instantaneously due to the release of poisonous gas from the 
volcanoes. Many of the volcanoes are situated in high mountainous regions and their 
crests always remain under heavy ice cover. But when eruption starts, the ice 
coverings melted and creates mud flow and creates heavy damages to the localities 
situated at the foot of the mountains. Moreover, occasionally the rock fragments and 
ashes ejected with explosive forces are being thrown into the air. 
The landforms that are created from the volcanic eruptions and lava remain unutilised 
for a longer period and brings noteworthy changes in the landscape. However, the 
landforms thus formed by volcanoes are very fertile and are also very rich in mineral 
resources. Moreover, the volcanic landforms are very important for tourists. 
Earthquakes 
What we learnt from this chapter : 
Earthquake : An earthquake is a vibration of the surface of the earth caused by 
sudden release of enormous pressure from the interior of the earth. 
Effects of Earthquake 
(a) 	Folds, cracks and landslides may occur and even the courses of the rivers is may 		 
be changed. 
(b)	Earthquake, if it occurs in any densely populated areas, will cause enormous 		 
damage to houses, roads and streets, water and gas supply system and other 		 
resources. 
(c) Earthquake, if occurs beneath the sea creates tremendous waves on the surface of 		 
the water. 
Volcanoes : The molten rocks of the interior of the earth finds its way to the surface 
through the cracks or weak points of the lithosphere. These ejected materials are 
known as lava which gradually accumulates in the surroundings areas of the cracks or 
openings and forms a high landform which is known as volcano. The volcanoes may 
be classified into three types viz, Shield volcano, Cinder cone and Mixed cone. 
Lithosphere	 49
Exercise 
Multiple Choice Questions 
1. 	The epicentre of the earthquake is -- 
	a. 	The place from where the intensity of strength of earthquake is being measured 
	b . 	The place where the earthquake is occurred 
	c. 	The points just vertically above the point of origin 
	d. 	The place where the earthquake is caused 
2. 	Which calamity will take place if there is an intermediate earthquake caused 	 
	in Dhaka? 
	 i. Loss of lives 
	ii. The multi-purpose building will be flop down 
	iii. The course of the river will be changed 
	 Which one is correct below? 
	a. i and ii 	b . ii and iii 
	c. i and iii 	d. i, ii and iii 
3. 	Which one below is considered to be less Earthquake prone belt? 
	 a. The outer border of the Pacific Ocean 
	b . The north part of the Mediterranean Sea 
	c. The mountain of the Mid-Africa 
	d. The ridge of the Mid-Atlantic Ocean 
Read the paragraph below and answer question number 4 and 5. 
The Earthquake that occurred in the year 2005 caused a great damage of the countries 
in tropical and equatorial zones. Meanwhile, a large number of earthquakes occurred 
around the world in the same year. Earthquake results huge natural calamities. 
4. 	The country, which is badly damaged in the earthquake in 2005 is -- 
	i. 	 Sri Lanka 
	ii. 	 Japan 
	iii. 	 Indonesia 
	Which one is corr ect below? 
	a. i 	b . ii 
	c. iii 	d. i, ii and iii 
50	 Secondary Geography
5. 	Tsunami brings in landmass -- 
	a. Sudden flood 	b . Sudden rain 
	c. Sudden quak e 	d. Sudden thunder 
Creative Questions 
1.	One fine morning Shuharto stood on the bank of the pond. Suddenly he felt a 			 
terrible jerking on lands and saw that the water of the pond overflowing on the 			 
otherside. At once, he saw that the wave of the water coming rush/fast towards 			 
him. He also saw that the fearful people are running here and there raising hue and 		 
cry. Shuharto was thinking about the incident. Is this a natural calamity? 
	a. 	The jerking that Shuharto felt on land, what was that? 
	b .	Why this type of incident occurs? 
	c. 	Draw a map to identify the earthquake prone belt of the Pacific. 
	d. 	‘Earthquake is recognized as a natural calamity’ give your opinion in favour of it. 
 
Lithosphere	 51
Landforms 
The earth is formed of diversified physical structures which is known as landform. 
These physical structures include the high mountains, vast traces of plain lands and 
also features of intermediate heights. The mountainous regions cover about 18 per 
cent, plateaus and hills about 24 per cent and the plain lands about 58 per cent of the 
total area of the earth. 
Mountains 
A mass of rock considerably very high occupying a vast area is known as a mountain. 
Higher altitude and steep slopes are its main characteristics. This altitude may reach to 
several thousand metres from the sea level. Some of the mountains may be located in 
isolation viz, the Kilimanjaro of East 
Africa. Again some mountains with 
several peaks may cover a large area 
(several thousand kilometres). This 
type of mountains are folded like the 
waves (Fig. 28) viz., the Himalayan 
Mountain which extends from Pamir 
Knot in the east. The Rocky and the 
Appalachian Mountains of North 
America, the Andes of South America, 
the Alps, the Ural, the Caucasus of 
Europe and the Fujiyama of Asia are 
noteworthy among other mountains.	 
Several mountain building processes known as Orogenesis work together in the 
formation of the mountain. Greek word ‘Orosí means mountain and ‘Genesisí means 
formation or creation. Tremendous weathering particularly the wind, water and glacier 
bring substantial changes in the landforms. 
Types of mountains : The mountains can be classified into four groups according to 
their major characteristics viz., (a) Fold Mountain, (b) Volcanic Mountain, (c) Block 
Mountain, and (d) Laccolith Mountain. 
(a) Fold Mountain : This type of mountains are generally constituted with the union of 
several vast and high mountain ranges. It can be said easily that when a tectonic plate 
enters into another adjacent plate then huge quantity of sediments are accumulated 
52	 Secondary Geography 
Fig. 28 : Fold Mountain 
Mountain Peak 
Mountain Foot 
Rock 
Strata 
Mountain Peak
 along the joint line of the two 
plates and due to lateral pressure, 
these sediments are folded giving 
rise to anticlines and synclines. 
The fold mountains are formed 
consisting of the synclines and 
anticlines covering a vast area. 
The Himalayan Mountains, the 
Alps, the Ural and the Rocky 
Mountains are the appropriate 
examples of the fold mountains 
(Fig. 29).	 
(b) Volcanic Mountain : Generally, the volcanic mountains are formed by the 
accumulation and solidification of the molten materials ejected through the volcanoes. 
This type of mountains are 
generally conical is shape. 
Depending on the nature of lava 
flow ejected through volcanoes, 
this type of mountain in some 
cases, may cover small area with 
steep slope (Fig. 30) as Mount St. 
Helena of the United States of 
America, and in other cases, may 
cover a large area with gentle	 
slope like the Fujiyama (Japan) and the Mouna Loa (Hawaii island). 
(c) Block Mountain : The block mountain has got at least one side to be very steep 
with natural fault. Movement of the earth creates fractures in the earthís crust. So, the 
rock strata on both the sides 
cannot match together and 
displacement starts among the 
strata. So, the earthís crust is 
displaced along the crack 
which is known as fauly. So in 
some part, this displacement 
may be upward and in another 
part it may be downward. The 
uplifted part along the fault is 
Lithosphere	 53 
Fig. 29 : Fold Mountain 
Fig. 30 : Volcanic Mountain 
Fig. 31 : Block Mountain 
Mountain 
Plains 
Fault Fault 
Magma 
Hill Volcano 
VOLCANIC 
MOUNTAIN 
ACTIVE VOLCANO 
LAVA 
EXTINCT VOLCANO 
VOLCANIC 
PLAIN 
Block Mountain 
Valley 
Lake 
Lake 
Fault 
Plains 
MAGMA
Fig. 32 : Laccolith Mountain 
known as Block Mountain (Fig. 31). The Black Forest of Germany and the Salt 
Mountain of Pakistan may be cited as examples. The valley which is formed due to 
the downward movement of the land between two faults is known as the Rift Valley.	 
(d) Laccolith Mountain : The molten magma tries to come out of the interior of the 
earth being dispalced by the pressure of the gas, but these molten materials, instead of 
coming out to the surface of the earth 
solidifies beneath the surface of the earthís 
crust. Due to upward thrust, the rock layer 
takes the shape of a tomb. The mountain 
thus formed is known as Laccolith or relict 
mountain (Fig. 32). The Henry Mountain 
of the United States of America is an 
example of this type of mountain. 
Plateau : The vast plain area lower than the mountain but higher in elevation than the 
plain land is known as Plateau. The formation of plateau is mainly linked with the 
mountain building processes (Fig. 33). 
The volcanic lava, in some cases, has 
formed a vast plain land as in the case of 
the Deccan Plateau of South India. 
Besides, the old mountainous regions, by 
the process of weathering and 
denudation has been converted into a 
plateau. According to the mode of 
location, the plateau may be classified into three types viz., (a) Intermontane Plateau, 
(b) The Piedmont Plateau, and (c) The Continental Plateau. 
(a) The Intermontane Plateau : 
The elevation of the Intermontane 
Plateaus range from 3000 to 5000 
metres. These plateaus are generally 
remain enclosed by mountains and 
are formed by the different 
mountain building processes. The 
Tibetan Plateau is of this type. This 
plateau is surrounded on the north 
by Kunlun, on the south by 
Himalaya and on the east and west 
by other mountain. The average elevation of this plateau is more than 4000 metres and 
the area is also more than 52 lakh square kilometres. Besides, the Bolivian Plateau of 
54	 Secondary Geography 
Fig. 34 : Intermontane Plateau 
Fig. 33 : Plateau 
Rift Valley 
Plateau 
Fold Mountain Peak Fold Mountain Peak 
Bolivian High Plateau 
Pacific 
Ocean
South America, the Mexican Plateau of Central America, the Mongolian and the 
Tarim Plateau of Asia are examples of this type of plateau (Fig. 34). 
(b) The Piedmont Plateau : This type of plateau is formed at the piedmont of high 
mountains. Due to extensive weathering in the mountainous slope, the eroded 
materials are deposited in the lower slopes of the mountains creating an extensive 
plain land which is known as Piedmont Plateau. However, the lower part of this type 
of plateau joins with the adjacent plain lands. Colorado located in the south western 
tip of the Rocky Mountain of the United States of America and Patagonia of South 
America are the Piedmont plateaus. 
(c) The Continental Plateau : The vast high plain land enclosed by seas or lowlands 
are known as Continental Plateau. This kind of plateaus do not have any relation with 
the mountains. Arabian Peninsula, Spain, Australia, Greenland are the best examples 
of this type of plateau. 
The population is very thin due to rugged relief and dry clilnate. However, these 
plateaus are rich in different minerals like tin, copper etc. Moreover, hydroelectric 
plants have also been established in the rapid flowing rivers of the plateaus. 
Plains 
An extensive high land above the sea level with gentle slope is known as Plains. Here, 
the plain means the land which is less rugged. This type of plains have been formed 
by the erosional and depositional work of different landforming activities like river, 
glacier, and wind. Gently undulating land with less rugged relief is most suitable for 
agriculture, settlement and road construction. So, dense settlements have been 
developed on the plain lands. 
On the basis of the origin of the plain 
land, the plains have been classified into 
two as erosional and depositional. 
Plains formed by erosion : This type of 
plains are formed due to continuous 
erosion accomplished by river, wind and 
glacier. The upper rocks are eroded 
gradually and the lands with steep slope 
are transformed to plains (Fig. 35). The 
plains at the foot of the Appalachian and 
the Siberian plains are the glaring 
examples of this type of plains. Madhupur 
and Barind region are the two examples 
of such plains formed by erosion in 
Lithosphere	 55 
Fig. 35 : Plains formed by erosion 
Plain Formed By Erosion 
Plain Formed By Erosion 
Old Stage 
Last Stage
Bangladesh. During the Pleistocene era that means about 8 to 10 lakh years ago, 
these areas were uplifted from the ocean by diastrophic action. In the later eras, these 
uplifted areas had been transformed to plains due to erosional activities by river. 
Plains formed by deposition : The plains are also formed by deposition. Formation 
of this kind of plains can be found anywhere starting from the mountainous regions to 
the sea coast. Rivers during their course can form valley such as the valley of Nepal. 
Alluvial fan can be formed at foot of the mountain or hill by deposition. In the lower 
course of a river, when its transportation power becomes sluggish, it overflows the 
banks creating flood and the sediments are deposited gradually on both sides of the 
river forming a plain land which is known as Flood Plain (Fig. 36). Flood plains of the 
Dhaleswari and the Jamuna can be mentioned as examples. A type of plain land is 
formed at the mouth of the river through deposition which is known as Delta (Fig. 
36). The south western part of Bangladesh includes such a delta which is known as 
the Ganges Delta. Besides, the plains are also formed in the coastal areas due to the 
influence of ebb and tide are known as coastal plain (Fig. 36). The coastal plains of 
Chittagong stretching from the mouth of the Feni river upto Teknaf is an example of 
this type of plains. The plains are also formed by the deposition of glacial moraines in 
the cold areas. The Prairie of Canada is an example of such plains. 
 
Fig. 36 : Plains formed by deposition 
Sometimes, the plains can also be formed by the depositional work of the wind. The 
Loess soil of North China and the Pampa of Argentina are the examples of such 
plains. The Loess soil is very fertile but very much erosion prone. 
56	 Secondary Geography 
Depositional : Alluvial fan 
Coastal Plain 
Sea 
Bay of Bengal 
Chittagong 
Noakhali 
Dhaka 
G Bhagirathi river 
Hooghly r iver 
Khulna 
Barisal 
Jessore 
Kolkata 
Delta Plains 
Coastal Plain 
Gonga Nadir Mohana 
Padma river 
Jamuna river 
Meghna river 
angess 
river 
Modimoti river 
Bhadra river 
Landforms 
What we learnt from this chapter : 
A mass of rock considerably higher than its surroundings occupying a vast area is 
known as mountain. The Mount Kilimanjaro of East Africa, the Himalayan Mountain 
and the Fujiama of Asia, the Rocky Mountain of North America are the examples of 
different types of mountains. 
Types : (a) Fold Mountain, (b) Volcanic Mountain, (c) Block Mountain, and (d) Laccolith 
Mountain. 
Plateau : An extensive flat elevated land lower than the mountains but higher than the 
plain land is known as plateau. According to their location, plateaus can be of three types 
viz., (a) Intermontane Plateau, (b) Piedmont Plateau, and (c) The Continental Plateau. 
Plains : An extensive area of level land of gentle slope usually of low altitude from sea 
level is known as plains. The plains are of two types such as (a) Erosional, and (b) 
Depositional. 
Exercise 
Multiple Choice Questions 
1. 	What kind of mountain is the Black Forest of Germany? 
	a. F old 	b . 	Volcanic 
	c. Block 	d. Laccolith 
2. 	The Delta deposition plains are formed -- 
	a. 	At the foot of mountain 	b . 	At near to the mouth of the river 
	c. 	The depositional work of the wind 	d. 	The deposition of glacial moraines 
3. 	The characteristics of the Mountains are -- 
	i. Higher altitude and steep slopes area 
	ii. An extensive high land above the sea level with gentle slope 
	iii. Generally the high and plain lands 
	Which one is corr ect below? 
	a. i 	b . ii 
	c. iii 	d. i, ii and iii 
Lithosphere	 57
4. 	The cause of the formation of the Delta -- 
	i. Through the deposit sediments of both sides of the river 
	ii. The layer of the river through deposition at the bank of the river 
	iii. Ri vers through their mountainous course can form valley 
	Which one is corr ect below? 
	a. i 	b . ii 
	c. iii 	 	d. i, ii and iii 
5. 	Which statement is correct against plateau? 
a. 			The volcanic lava at the mouth of the river through deposition creates 
b. 		The sediments are deposited by sluggishing the transportation power of river 
creates high landforms on the bank of the river 
c. 	The volcanic lava by the process of weathering and denudation in the old 
mountainous regions form the plain landforms 
d. 		 This type of plains are formed due to continuous erosion accompanied by river, 
wind and glacier 
Creative Questions 
1.		The earth is not equal everywhere. There are high mountains and plateaus. In some 
places there are hills and vast traces of plain lands. The high mountains through 
denudation formed plateau and plains. Again, a type of plain land is formed at the 
mouth of the river through deposition. Sometimes, different types of landforms are 
created by the ascending of the earth crust or by decaying. The delta in plains at 
the mouth of the river is very fertile. The Delta formed by the deposition of the 
river Padma, Brahmaputra and Jamuna is world famous. 
a. 	What is formed at near to the mouth of the river through deposition? 
b. 	State an important difference between fold mountain and laccolith mountain. 
c. 	By drawing the map of Bangladesh identify the plain lands formed through river 
deposition in the south-western part of Bangladesh. 
d. Analyze the economic importance of this plain lands formed at near to the 			 
mouth of the river. 
58	 Secondary Geography
Chapter Two 
Atmosphere 
The deep blanket of gas surrounding the earth is known as Atmosphere. The scientists 
opine that the atmosphere is about 35 years old. Its thickness is about 10,000 
kilometres. However, about 97 per cent of the total atmosphere remains confined 
within 30 kilometres upward from the earthís crust. The atmosphere remains in 
contact with the earth’s crust due to the gravitational attraction. Again due to the 
pressure of the layers of the atmosphere, density of air is highest at the sea level and 
decreases with height. 
Importance of the atmosphere : The atmosphere is of immense importance for the 
existence of the living organisms of the earth. The atmosphere safeguards the lives of 
living beings against the effect of harmful rays of the sun. Its gaseous elements like 
carbon dioxide rears the vegetation and oxygen safeguards the living creatures. The 
human activities on the surface of the earth helps to bring changes in the structure of 
the atmosphere, particularly large scale deforestation, industrial smoke, and burning 
of coal, mineral oil and the natural gas polluting the atmosphere. For the interest of 
the living beings of the earth, we should refrain ourselves from contaminating the 
atmosphere. So, we should have an idea about the structure of the atmosphere and 
how it works. 
Structure of the atmosphere : Atmosphere is constituted by the mixture of several 
gases. The composition of the atmosphere remains fairly constant roughly upto an 
altitude of 80 kilometres. Nitrogen and oxygen are the two important constituents of 
pure dry air. So far the volume is concerned, these two gases jointly constitute 98.73 
per cent and the rest of 1.27 per cent being occupied by other gases. A list of different 
constituent elements are presented below : 
Nitrogen (N2) 	78.02 % 
Oxygen (O2) 	20.71 % 
Argon (Ar) 	0.80 % 
Carbon dioxide (CO2) 	0.03 % 
Ozone (O3) 	0.0001 % 
Other 	0.4399 % 
	T otal 100.00% 
Other gases include helium, krypton, zenon, hydrogen, methane, and nitrous oxide. 
But the water vapour and dust particles are also found in different scale in the 
atmosphere. The amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is only 0.03 per cent. 
Atmosphere	 59
This meagre amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is much important for the 
atmospheric processes. Because, this gas helps the short waves of the sunís rays to 
reach the earth. The short waves rays after coming in contact with the earthís surface 
transform themselves to long waves. Carbon dioxide absorbs these long waves in the 
lower atmosphere. As a result, the atmosphere becomes hot. 
Atmospheric layers : The atmosphere can be 
divided vertically into four divisions according 
to the characteristics (temperature, pressure, 
density) of its different elements. These are 
Troposphere, Stratosphere, Mesosphere, and 
Thermosphere (Fig. 37). 
Troposphere : This is the lowest layer of the 
atmosphere and it remains in contact with 
the earth’s crust. This layer is very much 
important for weather and climate. The upper 
limit of the troposphere instead of terminating 
suddenly, its characteristics gradually fade 
away and mix up with the next stratosphere 
layer. The last part of the atmosphere is 
known as Tropopause. The thickness of the 
troposphere is 8 kilometres in the polar region 
and 16 to 19 kilometres in the equatorial 
region. The characteristics of the troposphere are the following :	 
(a) 	The density and the temperature decrease with the increase of altitude. The 		 
decrease of temperature with increase of altitude is known as the normal lapse rate. 
(b)	The velocity of the wind increases with the increases of altitude. 
(c)	The lo wer atmosphere contains water vapour. 
(d)	The wind moves upward and downward. 
(e)	All sorts of weather and climatic processes are accomplished in this layer . 
Stratosphere : The next layer of the atmosphere is stratosphere which extends upto 
50 kilometres (Fig. 37). Maximum amount of ozone gas is available in this layer. This 
ozone layer absorbs maximum ultra violet rays of the sun. So, this earth has become 
suitable abode of the living creatures. Both density and pressure are comparatively 
less in this layer and the temperature also does not show a change in the lower 
atmosphere. However, from the 20th kilometre upwards, the temperature records a 
gradual rise and continues upto 50 kilometres in the high stratosphere. There is no 
water vapour in stratosphere. Stratopause exists above this layer. 
60	 Secondary Geography 
Fig. 37 : Atmospheric layers 
Mesosphere : The temperature decreases rapidly from the stratosphere upwards upto 
80 kilometres. This vast area is known as mesosphere. But the temperature again 
increases after the 80th kilometre. This layer is known as mesopause. Air pressure is 
very feeble in mesosphere. 
Thermosphere : Thermosphere extends upward from the mesopause. The lower part 
of the thermosphere is known as ionosphere. Above the ionosphere, there are other 
two layers such as exosphere and magnetosphere. 
Weather and climate : The daily average condition of temperature, pressure, wind, 
humidity and precipitation for any place is the weather. Generally, climate is the 
average condition of the weather for 30 to 40 years. 
Elements of weather and climate : The elements of weather and climate are : (1) 
Wind temperature, (2) Wind pressure, (3) Wind movement, (4) Humidity, and (5) 
Precipitation. 
Controls of weather and climate : The elements of weather and climate are 
controlled by the following factors. These are latitude, altitude, distance from the sea, 
location of the mountains, relief of the land, wind movement, ocean currents, slope of 
the land, soil and the forests. 
1. Latitude : This is one of the most important controls of climate as the incidence of 
sunís rays varies with the latitude. The sun gives its rays vertically over the equator 
and as a result, the temperature is high in this region. On the other hand, the higher 
latitudes receive inclined or slanting rays and hence the temperature is low. Generally, 
the atmospheric temperature decreases from the equator towards the poles. 
2. Altitude : The atmospheric temperature decreases with the increases of altitude. 
There is a decrease of temperature of 6∞ Celsius for every 1000 metres of increase of 
altitude. Though two places being situated on the same latitude, but their climate will 
differ due to the difference in altitude. As for example, Dinajpur and Shillong though 
located on the same latitude but the climate differs due to the variation in altitude. The 
temperature in Shillong is much lesser than that of Dinajpur. 
3. Distance from the ocean : The climate of a place becomes mild if it is located 
nearer to the sea or ocean. As the climate of Coxís Bazar, Chittagong and Patuakhali 
is milder than that of Bogra being situated nearer to the sea. No remarkable variation 
of temperature between winter and summer and between days and nights is found in 
the coastal regions. This type of climate is known as equable climate. But the regions 
away from the coastal area experiences extreme climate during winter and summer, 
because the landmass gets warmer as well as colder more quickly than that of the 
waterbodies. For this reason, the interior parts of the continent during summer become 
very hot and equally these become very cold during winter. This type of climate is 
known as the continental climate or extreme climate. 
Atmosphere	 61
4. Wind movement : The wind movement plays an important role on the climate of a 
place. If any wind blows saturated with water vapour, then this may cause abundant 
rainfall there. During the rainy season, the monsoon full of water vapour brings heavy 
shower in Bangladesh. Again during the winter season, the continental air brings no 
rainfall in Bangladesh and the temperature decreases. 
5. Ocean currents : The air of the coastal area becomes either cold or warm due to 
the influence of cold or warm ocean currents. As for example, it can be mentioned that 
the eastern coast of the United States of America records an increase of temperature 
due to the influence of the Warm Gulf Stream. Again, the cold Labrador Current keeps 
the eastern coast of North America cold. 
6. Location of the mountains : Wind movement, when obstructed by the high 
mountains, can create influence on the climate. The monsoon air being obstructed by 
the athwart situation of the Himalayan mountain in the north, brings heavy shower in 
Bangladesh, India and Nepal. On the other hand, during winter the cold airmass of 
Central Asia cannot cross the Himalayas and so the climate of the sub-continent never 
gets cold like Europe. 
7. Slope of the land : The air and the land become heated where the sunís rays fall 
directly on the slopes of the high lands. But to the opposite side of the slope, the air 
remains cold due to the inclined or feeble sunís rays. 
8. Soil : The structure of soil or its texture play a vital role in the preservation of 
temperature. The sandy soil of the uncovered areas becomes hot as well as cold 
quickly. But in comparison to sandy soil, the alluvial and the clayey soil take much 
time to become either warm or cold due to heat preservation capacity. 
9. Location of the forest : The vegetation by its evapo-transpiration activity helps the 
air to be saturated with water vapour, and this saturated air being condensed brings 
rainfall. Besides, the intensity of storms, and cyclones are reduced being obstructed by 
the forest. The air of the dense forest remains comparatively cold as the sun rays 
cannot penetrate the dense to heat the soil. 
Insolation and Air Temperature 
Variation in insolation : The atmosphere receives 99.97 per cent of its total energy 
from the sun. The energy thus received from the sun is transformed as heat energy or 
energy of motion in the atmosphere. The amount of energy received from the sun by 
the earth through radiation in the form of small waves is the insolation. During 
transmission, a considerable amount of this energy is absorbed, scattered and reflected 
by the atmosphere. In the clear sky, about 80 per cent of this energy can reach the 
earth through the atmosphere and the rest of 20 per cent is lost in the space. Even the 
total energy that the earth receives from the sun is not distributed equally throughout 
the world. The amount of energy received by the equatorial region, in comparison to 
62	 Secondary Geography
this, loses less amount of energy. On the other hand, the condition is just the opposite 
in the polar regions, in other words, the polar regions lose more energy than what they 
receive. The solar energy tries to bring equilibrium of this unequal distribution of 
insolation through the wind movement and the ocean currents. 
The controlling factors of insolation : The amount of insolation that any portion 
of the earthís surface gets in a day will depend on two factors viz., (a) The intensity of 
insolation depends on the verticality or the inclination of the sumís rays, (b) Duration 
of the day in comparison to night and the solar radiation. With the changing positions 
of the sun, the above two factors act seperately from the equatorial region to the poles 
in different latitudes and in different seasons. 
In figure 38, it is observed 
that the intensity of the 
vertical rays is greater as 
it passes through a 
comparatively thinner layer 
of atmosphere and it 
concentrates in a smaller 
area. The different latitudes 
lying between the Tropic of 
Cancer and the Tropic of 
Capricorn get vertical rays 
at noon. On the other hand, 
the oblique solar rays pass 
through a thicker layer and 
it covers a larger area. Due to these two reasons, the intensity of solar rays during 
summer is more than that of the winter. Again the intensity of morning and afternoon 
rays is less than that of the noonís rays.	 
The earthís crust gets sufficient time, if the day is long, to receive more solar energy 
and consequently both the earthís crust and the atmosphere become warm. On the 
other hand, if any place, the nights are longer, then that place remains cold as it 
receives less amount of insolation due to short duration of day time. 
Air temperature : The warmth and the coldness situation of the atmosphere is the air 
temperature. The sunís rays or the solar energy is the major reason for such warmth or 
coldness of the atmosphere. 
Atmosphere	 63 
Fig. 38 : Incidence of sun rays 
VERTICAL SUN RAYS 
0.0929 
Square 
Metre 
0.0929 
Square 
Metre 
SLANTING RAYS
Transformation of temperature between the earthís crust and the atmosphere : 
Temperature is transferred between the earthís crust and the atmosphere by three 
processes. These are radiation, conduction and convection. 
Radiation : Electromagnetic waves can transfer energy (both temperature and light) into 
two objects without any medium. The same process also occurs in case of solar energy. 
Sun rays of a fixed wave length reaches the earth penetrating the atmosphere through 
this process. Again by radiating heat through this process, the earth becomes cold. 
Conduction : This is a process by which heat can be transferred through a close 
contact. In this way heat is transferred from one part of an object to another. The crust 
of the earth becomes heated by the process of transference of heat. 
Convection : The heated particles transfer heat from hot areas to the cold areas 
through the process of convection. This process is also found to occur in case of liquid 
and gas. In this case, the liquid or gas becomes lighter being heated and rises up and 
the surrounding cold liquid or gas occupies the vaccum space. The temperature of the 
atmosphere is transferred this way. 
So, the sunís rays through radiation, after penetrating the atmosphere, reaches the 
earthís surface. Through conduction, the earthís surface is heated and by convection, 
there is a exchange of temperature between water and the atmosphere. 
Distribution of temperature : Due to the influence of latitude and altitude, the 
temperature of different places differ in different seasons. There is a change of 
temperature of any locality due to diurnal and annual motion of the earth. Besides, 
variation of temperature occurs due to wind movement. 
So, though the temperature differs in different places, yet we get an average 
distribution pattern of seasonal temperature throughout the world. Isotherms are used 
to show the distribution of average temperature. The imazinary lines joining the points 
of equal temperature on a map is known as Isotherm. The isotherms show the 
temperature of all points or the average for many days or several months of a year for 
any particular time. The horizontal distribution of temperature of the earth for the 
months of January and July is shown by isotherms (Fig. 39). With the change of 
season, the highest temperature is also changed in the northern and southern 
hemispheres. For example, the lowest and the highest temperature is recorded in the 
month of January and July respectively in the northern hemisphere. But during that 
time, completely, opposite condition prevails in the southern hemisphere. 
Air Pressure 
Like any other matter, the air has its own weight. The pressure of the air thus created 
due to the weight of the air is known as air pressure. 
64	 Secondary Geography
Fig. 39 : Distribution of isotherm 
Atmosphere	 65 
0 1000 2000 Km 
N 
JULY 
TEMPERATURE SHOWN IN∞ CENTIGRASE 
TEMPERATURE SHOWN IN∞ CENTIGRADE 
N 
60∞ 
60∞ 60∞ 
60∞ 90∞ 
120∞ 150∞ 180∞ 150∞ 120∞ 90∞ 60∞ 30∞ 0∞ 30∞ 
120∞ 150∞ 180∞ 150∞ 120∞ 90∞ 60∞ 30∞ 0∞ 30∞ 
120∞ 150∞ 180∞ 150∞ 120∞ 90∞ 60∞ 30∞ 0∞ 30∞ 
120∞ 150∞ 180∞ 150∞ 120∞ 90∞ 60∞ 30∞ 0∞ 30∞ 
60∞ 90∞ 
60∞ 
60∞ 
30∞ 
30∞ 
0∞ 
60∞ 
60∞ 
30∞ 
30∞ 
0∞ 
30∞ 
0∞ 
30∞ 
10∞ 
10∞ 
5∞ 
15∞ 
15∞ 
15∞ 
20∞ 
20∞ 
25∞ 
20∞ 
10∞ 
5∞ 5∞ 
25∞ 
25∞ 
20∞ 
15∞ 
10∞
5∞ 
15∞ 
20∞ 
10∞ 
5∞ 
0∞ 
-5∞
-10∞ 
-20∞ 
-20∞ 
-25∞ 
-25∞ 
-2 5∞ 
-30∞ 
30∞ 
30∞ 
35∞ 
40∞ 
50∞ 
25∞ 
20∞ 
15∞
0∞
5∞ 5∞ 
10∞ 
15∞ 
20∞ 
15∞ 
25∞ 
10∞ 
10∞ 
25∞ 
25∞ 
20∞ 
15∞ 
10∞ 
N
N 
60∞ 
30∞ 
30∞ 
30∞ 
0∞ 
30∞ 
N
N 
0 1000 2000 Km 
JANUARY
Pressure Belts 
Due to the variation of temperature in different latitudes and the rotaion of the earth, 
several pressure zones have been formed at the lower layer of the atmosphere which 
are known as pressure belts (Fig. 40). 
1. Equatorial Low Pressure Belt : This Equatorial Low Pressure Belt occupies an 
area lying on both sides of the equator extending from 0∞ to 5∞. This region receives 
vertical sunís rays throughout the whole year. The air pressure is low over this region 
as the air in comparison to its surrounding areas is hot and light. Moreover, this region 
has more waterbodies. As a result, low pressure which is known as Equatorial Low 
Pressure Belt has been formed. 
1. Tropical High Pressure Belt : 
More the equatorial hot, humid and 
light air goes up, more it becomes cold. 
Thus warm air continuously rises up but 
it cannot come down in the equatorial 
zone. As a result, the upper air starts 
moving towards north and south. In this 
way, the upper cold and heavy air starts 
coming down in the tropical region 
between 25∞ to 30∞. Thus two heavy 
pressure belts are formed in the mid 
region between 25∞ to 35∞ North and 
South latitudes. These two pressure 
belts are known as the Tropical High 
Pressure Belts (One over the Tropical of Cancer and the other one over the Tropic of 
Capricorn). 	 
3. Subpolar Low Pressure Belt : The rotational force of the earth at two polar 
regions is very high. As a result, the wind of these two regions moves towards the 
tropics. During that time, the pressure of the wind decreases at two arctic regions 
(between 60∞ to 70∞ latitudes) creating two low pressure belts. These two are known 
as Subpolar Low Pressure Belts. 
4. Polar High Pressure Belt : The wind nearer to the two poles is very cold and 
heavy due to the location in the cold regions. So, two high pressure belts have been 
formed at two polar regions. These two are known as Polar High Pressure Belts. The 
wind from these two high pressure belts moves towards the subpolar low pressure 
belts. 
66	 Secondary Geography 
Fig. 40 : Pressure belts 
High Pressure Belt 
High Pressure Belt 
Polar Low Pressure Belt 
Polar Low Pressure Belt 
Cancer High Pressure and Doldrums 
Capricorn High Pressure and Doldrums 
Equatorial Low Pressure and Doldrums
The value of pressure is shown as milibar (mb). At the sea level, this pressure of the 
air is about 6.7 kg. per 6.45 square centimetres. The pressure of the wind decreases 
with the increase of altitude. Sea level height is internationally accepted as zero (0) 
height to measure the air pressure. The pressure of the wind is measured by an 
instrument known as Barometer. The lines joining the places on a map having equal 
average pressure is known as Isobar. The air moves from high pressure area towards 
low pressure area. 
Due to difference in temperature and pressure the air moves from one part of the earth 
to another. This movement of the air is known as wind. The wind has certain specific 
characteristics as follows : 
1. 	The cold and heavy air moves from the areas of high pressure to low pressure area. 
2. 	According to Ferrel ís Law, the air moves towards right in the northern hemisphere 	 
	and to wards left in the southern hemisphere. 
The wind system of the earth can be divided into four types. These are Planetary 
wind, Seasonal wind, Local wind, and Irregular wind. 
Planetary wind : These winds being controlled by the pressure belts, blow towards 
the same direction throughout the whole year. The planetary wind is of three types 
such as : the trade wind, the westerlies and the polar wind. The planetary wind system 
has been shown in fig. 41. 
The trade wind : The sunís rays fall vertically over the equatorial region, so the air 
becomes hot and goes upwards. Since the pressure is less upward, the rising air gets 
room for expansion and consequently the air becomes cool and dense. The cool air 
could not come down directly due to warm air at the bottom. As a result, the air moves 
towards north and south directions through the upper atmosphere. Moving upto 30∞ 
latitudes some part of this air finds its way to come downward and blows towards the 
equatorial low pressure belt. This part of the air is known as the Trade Wind. 
According to Ferrelís Law, the trade wind blows from north-east in the northern 
hemisphere and south-east in the southern hemisphere. The trade wind of northern 
hemisphere is known as North-East Trade Wind and that of southern hemisphere as 
South-East Trade Wind. The sky remains clear and the weather is hot and dry as this 
trade wind originates in the high pressure zones. The big deserts of the world are 
situated nearer to this area. For example, the Sahara desert, the Lybian desert, the 
Arabian desert in the northern hemisphere and the Kalahari desert in the southern 
hemisphere can be mentioned. 
Atmosphere	 67
Fig. 41 : Planetary wind 
The Westerlies : Some part of the air from 30∞ latitude blows towards the poles over 
the surface of the earth and after reaching 60∞ latitude faces the cold and dense air 
coming from the poles. So, comparatively the warm and light air from the tropical 
areas rises above the dense cold polar air and a part of it blows towards the polar low 
pressure belt. This is known as West Wind. In the northern hemisphere, it blows from 
south-west and in the southern hemisphere from north-west. As the area of the 
landmass is greater in the northern hemisphere, so locally, some changes occur in the 
air motion. However, in the southern hemisphere, the maximum area is covered by the 
waterbodies and hence the west wind can move uninterrupted. The velocity of the 
westerlies reaches at the highest between 40∞ to 47∞ South latitude. This region is 
called Roaring Forties. This air movement is known as Brave West Winds. Two more 
airmasses regularly move from north and south polar high belts towards the subpolar 
lows. These are known as north-east and south-east polar winds. In this, the 
circulation of planetary wind system (the trade, the westerlies and the polar) exists 
between the equator and the poles. 
Temporary wind : The wind which is caused due to the difference of temperature of 
land and water occurring during at specific time of the day or during a particular 
season of the year is known as temporary wind such as : the monsoon, the land and 
the sea breezes. 
The Monsoon : In Arabic ‘Monsooní means season. The most important characteristics 
of this wind is the changes in the wind direction with the seasons. The monsoon is also 
68	 Secondary Geography 
High Pressure 
North Polar Wi nd 
Low Pressur e 
The Wester lies 
High Pressure 
North-East Trade Wind 
Low Pressur e 
South-East Trade Wind 
The Westerlie s 
Low Pressure 
High Pressure 
High Pressure 
90∞ 
60∞ N 
30∞ N 
0∞ 0∞ 
30∞ S 
60∞ S 
90∞ 
60∞ 
30∞ 
30∞ 
60∞ 
South Polar Wind 
a regional air. This mainly prevails in south and south-east Asia. Besides, that the 
monsoon is also observable in North Australia, part of Africa and in the United States of 
America. During summer a low pressure is formed due to excessive heat along the midlatitudes 
or in the north-west of the Indian sub-continent. Hot and moist air from the 
adjacent oceans blows towards the continent. According to Ferrelís Law, after crossing 
the equator this wind is transformed into the south-west monsoon. This wind being 
obstructed by the high mountains, causes heavy shower on the land. 
During winter the interior part of Asia remains very cold and so there creates a high 
pressure cells. The cold air blows from the north-east high pressure area of the 
landmass towards the low pressure zone of the ocean. As this air originates in 
landmass, it is dry and it doesnít contain any water vapour. This is why the Central 
and South Asian regions remain dry in winter. However, when this blows over the Bay 
of Bengal it acquires great amount of water moisture and ultimately causes shower to 
the coast of Sri Lanka and Tamil Nadu. This air, however, when crosses the equator 
according to Ferrelís Law blows over North Australia as the north-east monsoon and 
acquires large amount of water moisture from the Indian Ocean causing heavy shower 
to northern Australia. 
Land and Sea Breezes : In the coastal regions, the temperature of local landmass 
increases with the advancement of the day and a low pressure is established locally 
and comparatively the cool air from the adjacent sea blows towards the land (Fig. 42). 
Atmosphere	 69 
Fig. 42 : Land and sea breezes 
This is known as sea breeze. The velocity of this air reaches to its maximum in the 
afternoon. The air blows from the high pressure zone formed over the ocean towards 
low pressure area over the landmass as the temperature in the afternoon increases. 
After the sun set, the landmass cools quickly in comparison to the ocean. During that 
time, the high pressure prevails over the landmass. So, the air moves from the high 
pressure area formed over the landmass towards the ocean (Fig. 42). This is known as 
the Land Breeze. 
Local Wind : The wind which is created due to the difference in diversity of 
landscapes and in temperature is known as local wind. There are about several 
hundreds of such local winds such as the valley and the mountain breeze. 
Valley and Mountain Breeze : A special type of wind movement is found to occur in 
the mountainous regions due to the relief of the land. During the day time, the sides of 
the mountains become more warmer 
in comparison to the bottom of the 
valley. As a result, the high pressure 
prevails at the bottom of the valley 
and low pressure on the sides of the 
mountains. The wind which is found 
to rise upwards along the slopes of 
the mountains during day time is 
known as valley wind (Fig. 43). 
During night time, the slopes of the 
mountains cools down due to 
radiation. At this time, the valley 
floor remains comparatively hot. 
So, the cool and heavy air comes 
down the slopes of the mountain. 
The wind which during night time 
moves along the slope of the 
mountains towards the valley floor is known as the mountain breeze (Fig. 43). 
Irregular Wind : In some places, the air pressure decreases and low pressure is 
formed due to high temperature. Again, high pressure is localised in some places due 
to much coldness. The wind movements thus formed is known as Irregular Wind such 
as : cyclones and anti-cyclones. 
Atmospheric Humidity and Precipitation 
Humidity is the amount of water vapour present in the air. The humidity of the air can 
be expressed in two ways such as, absolute humidity and relative humidity. Absolute 
humidity refers to the amount of water vapour per unit volume of air. 
On the other hand, relative humidity represents the amount of water vapour actually 
70	 Secondary Geography 
Fig, 43 : Valley and mountain breeze 
present in the air (absolute humidity) compared with on the other hand, relative 
humidity is the ratio of the amount of water vapour actually present (absolute 
humidity) in the air to the amount of water vapour required to saturate the same 
amount of air at a given temperature and pressure. 
The humidity of the air mainly depends on the water vapour. The air receives the 
water vapour through evaporation of water from the open waterbodies (sea, rivers and 
small waterbodies) as well as from vegetation. 
The air is said to be saturated when at a particular temperature, the air cannot absorb 
more water vapour. 
If the air starts cooling it cannot hold the water vapour it had, then some of the water 
vapour is transformed into water particles. This is known as condensation temperature 
at which the water vapour is condensed is known as Dew Point. 
If the temperature is 0∞ Celsius or remains below freezing point, then the water vapour 
becomes hard and falls on the earthís surface as ice crystals or snow. But if the 
condensation temperature or dew point remains above the freezing temperature then 
the water vapour after condensation becomes dew, fog or rains. 
Snow : In the cold regions, if the temperature falls below the freezing point then the 
water vapour of the air condenses like the carded cotton and falls on the earth. This is 
known as snow. 
Dew : After radiating the temperature, the earthís crust gets cold at night. The 
atmospheric stratum adjacent to the earthís crust also becomes cold coming in contact 
with the cold earth. So, the water vapour containing capacity of the air is also 
decreased and hence the extra amount of water vapour which the air cannot carry is 
transformed to water and rest on the earth as water drops. This is known as dew. In the 
cold regions when the temperature of the earthís crust goes below the freezing point 
then the dew is condensed to frost. 
Fog : In the winter season due to close contact with earth crust, the temperature in the 
lower atmospheric strata is decreased. Consequently, centering the dust particles of 
the air, condensation starts in the lower strata of the atmosphere which is ultimately 
transformed to tiny water particles. These water particles remain in the air in a 
floating state. This is known as fog. 
Rainfall : Saturated air going up becomes cool and condensed and transformed into 
cloud. A cloud contains innumerable water and ice particles. These water and ice 
particles coalesce together to form a bigger size of water particles which due to 
gravitational force fall on the earthís surface as rain. The rainfall is of four types such 
as : convectional, orographic, cyclonic and frontal. 
Atmosphere	 71
Convectional rain : In the low pressure 
region, the air being heated goes high into 
the atmosphere and expands. So, it easily 
cools down. The rainfall which is caused 
due to condensation of the water vapour is 
known as Convectional rain (Fig. 44). 
The rising air, in the equatorial low 
pressure zone, contains plenty of water 
vapour and on condensation causes regular 
Convectional rain there.	 
Orographic rain : The moistureladen wind is forced to rise up the slope of the 
obstructed mountain, is cooled down 
and on condensation causes rain on the 
windward side of the mountain. This 
type of rainfall is known as Orographic 
rain (Fig. 45). No rainfall is found to 
occur on the other side of the mountain 
as the air remains dry. This side is 
known as Leeward Slope. The southwest 
monsoon being obstructed by the 
hills of Meghalay gives abundant 
orographic rain in Sylhet.	 
Cyclonic rain : The air from the centre of the cyclone rising upward becomes cool. 
At this moment, the excess water vapour of the air condenses and causes rainfall. This 
type of rainfall is called as Cyclonic rain. 
Frontal rain : When the cold and warm airmasses meet together, then it coming in 
contact with cold air, the temperature of the warm air decreases and reaches the 
condensation level. This condensation is deepened and gives rain in the conflict area. This 
is known as Frontal rain (Fig. 46). This type of rain is found in the temperate regions. 
Fig. 46 : Frontal rain 
72	 Secondary Geography 
Fig. 45 : Orographic rain 
Fig. 44 : Convectional rain 
WARM AND HUMID AIR 
FRONT 
RAINFALL 
DRY 
COLD AIR 
HOT MOIST 
AIR 
SEA 
HOT 
LANDMASS 
CLOUD 
EARTH SURFACE 
Atmosphere	 73 
Monsoon Climate 
Characteristics of the Monsoon : It has been discussed earlier that the monsoon is a 
seasonal wind in which there is a complete or almost complete reversal of wind 
direction. Along with the change of direction of wind, there is also a change in the 
characteristics of the monsoon wind. Due to the reversal nature of the wind direction, 
the winter remains dry and abundant rain comes in summer. The air is dry in winter as 
it originates in the landmass. During winter season, the monsoon wind starts blowing 
from the landmass and while crossing ocean it absorbs moisture and brings abundant 
rainfall on the landmass it comes across. The winter monsoon causes rainfall in the 
north-east coast of Sri Lanka, in the coast of Tamil Nadu, in West Japan and in the 
east coast of the Philippines. The summer monsoon, as it blows from the ocean 
towards the landmass, carries sufficient moisture with it. As a result, heavy shower 
occurs. It is due to the effect of the monsoon, that the variation of temperature is less 
between the winter and the summer in the low latitudes. However, the intensity of 
winter is well felt in the mid-latitudes. During this time, the cold continental airmass 
can reach the mid-latitudes. The mid-latitudinal regions come under the influence of 
tropical airmass in summer. So, hot weather prevails there (Fig. 47). 
	
	H = High Pressure 	L = Lo w Pressure 
Fig. 47 : Monsoon winds movement and pressure of South and South-East Asia 
Geographical locations of the Monsoon : Most of the monsoon regions are located 
in Asia, particularly in South and South-East Asia. The vastness of Asia, the situation 
of the Himalayas and the location of the warm water in south-eastern part create great 
difference in temperature between the landmass and the waterbodies. This difference 
of temperature is the cause for the formation of the monsoon. 
The monsoon climate of South and South-East Asia covers India, Bangladesh, 
Pakistan, Nepal, Myanmar, Thailand, Laos, Cambodia, Vietnam, Malaysia and the 
Philippines. Besides, the monsoon climate is also found to prevail in China, Taiwan, 
Japan, Korea and the northern coast of Australia. 
Monsoon climate of South Asia : Three seasons are found in Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, 
Pakistan and India due to the influence of monsoon climate. These are : 

74	 Secondary Geography 
1. Winter season : From October to the end of February. 
2. Summer season : From March to the end of May. 
3. Rainy season : From June to the end of September. 
Among the three seasons, the rainy season is most important. The pattern of monsoon 
wind system of winter and summer has been shown in fig. 47. The air blows from the 
land to the ocean in winter and from the ocean to the land in summer. South Asian 
countries experience more or less rainfall in all the seasons in different localities. But 
about 80 per cent of the total rainfall occurs in the rainy seasons. The winter season in 
this region starts to prevail just after the rainy season. The durability and intensity of 
winter differs with the variation of the regions. As for example, the intensity of winter 
is moderate in central Bangladesh and is simply unbearable in northern India during 
the same period. Temperature shows an increase from March and reaches to the 
maximum in May. A low pressure develops during this period over the area causing 
the maritime air to blow towards this region. By June this maritime air reaches the 
landmass with its fullest intensity and in this way the ‘burst of the monsooní starts 
which brings the rainy season. 
The Monsoon Climate of South-East and East Asia : The winter monsoon of 
South-East Asia is influenced by the Siberian airmass and so it is cold and dry. The 
wind first blows towards the east and then takes a turn towards the equatorial region. 
As this wind blows over the ocean, it causes abundant rain in the western coast of 
Japan, in the Philippines, and in South China. Due to the formation of the low 
pressure in Central Asia during summer (May to September), the air from the adjacent 
oceans starts to blow towards East and South-East Asia. Consequently, it gives rain 
first in South-East Asia and later in East Asian countries. 
Importance of the Monsoon : The impact of monsoon is very much important in the 
agricultural sector, particularly in South and East Asia. The crop calendar of these 
regions is mostly controlled by the monsoon climate. For example, the agriculture of 
Bangladesh is hard hit by drought if monsoon rain does not start in time and if the 
rainfall is not in required quantity. 
Atmosphere 
What we learnt from this chapter : 
The coverage of the air which surrounds the earth is known as atmosphere. 
Atmosphere is formed by the mixture of different gases. The main two constituent 
elements of fresh and dry air is nitrogen and oxygen. 
The atmospheric layers are divided into four divisions such as : Troposphere, 
Stratosphere, Mesosphere and Thermosphere. 
Weather and climate : The weather is a daily average condition of atmospheric, 
temperature, pressure, rainfall, humidity, and the air movement for a certain place. 
Again the climate is the average condition of weather for 30 to 40 years.
Atmosphere	 75 
Solar energy : The amount of energy received by the earth through radiation in the 
form of small waves is the solar energy. The solar energy is transformed through the 
process of radiation, conduction and convection. 
Air movement : Due to difference in pressure and temperature, the air moves from 
one part of the earth to another. The movement of air is known as the wind. The wind 
moves from high pressure to low pressure zone. The wind system of the earth is 
divided into four types. These are Planetary wind, Seasonal wind, Local wind and 
Irregular wind. 
Land and sea breeze : In the coastal areas with the advent of the day, the temperature 
of the air over the landmasses is increased. So, to neutralize the pressure, cold and 
dense air from the sea starts blowing over the land. This is known as sea breeze. 
Just after the sun sets, the temperature over the landmass cools down quickly. But at 
that time, the ocean remains comparatively warm. So, the air blows from the land 
towards the sea. This is known as land breeze. 
Rainfall : The moistureladen air goes high into the sky and cools down and is 
transformed into cloud. The cloud contains innumerable water and ice particles. These 
water and ice particles coalesce together to form a bigger size of water particles. So, 
by the gravitational attraction of the earth, these water particles fall on the earth as 
rain. Rainfall can be divided into four types such as : Convectional, Orographic, 
Cyclonic and Frontal. 
Exercise 
Multiple Choice Questions 
1. 	On the influence of the increasing temperature of the earth -- 
	a. Carbon dioxide is reduced in the atmosphere 
	b . Frequent cause of sudden flood 
	c. The damage of the bio-diversity 
	d. The destruction of the green forest 
2. 	The characteristics of the monsoon is -- 
	i. The monsoon is a regional air 
	ii. The change in the wind direction with the season 
	iii. Mainly pre vail in the South Asia 
	Which one is corr ect below? 
	a. i and ii 	b . i and iii 
	c. ii and iii 	d. i, ii and iii 
76	 Secondary Geography 
Magnetosphere 
Exosphere 
Thermosphere 
Mesosphere 
Stratosphere 
Troposphere 
Notice about the figure below and answer to the question number 3 and 4. 
3.	What type of rainfall does the figure represents? 
	a. Con vectional 	b . Frontal 
	c. Cyclonic 	d. Orographic 
4.	Why there is no rainfall in the Middle East though there are huge mountains 	 
	as sho wn the categories of rainfall in the figure? 
	i. Distance from the Ocean 
	ii. Because of the influence of the desert 
	iii. Because the air doesn ít contain any air vapour 
	Which one is corr ect below? 
	a. i and ii 	b . ii and iii 
	c. i and iii 	d. i, ii and iii 
Creative Questions 
1. 	Answer the questions from the given figure below. 
	
	a. 	What does the figure above represent? 
	b . 	Why does the Troposphere important? 
c. 		Explain which layer is immensely important for living organism as shown in 
the figure? 
d. 	‘The destruction of the Ozone layer is one of the reasons to increase the air 			 
temperature on earthí-- explain.
Atmosphere	 77 
Chapter Three 
The Hydrosphere 
Definition : The hydrosphere is the mantle of water which covers the lower parts of 
the surface of the globe. The hydrosphere covers 71 per cent of the surface of the 
globe. Its area is about 36.25 lakh square kilometres. 
The hydrosphere is formed of oceans, seas, gulfs, lakes etc. The great stretch of open 
water is known as Ocean, the smaller areas less than ocean are the seas. The open 
stretch of water surrounded on three sides by land is the bay while the gulf is 
surrounded by land almost on all sides. The lakes are the stretches of water 
surrounded by land. 
The Oceans 
There are five oceans in the world. These are : the Pacific Ocean, the Atlantic Ocean, 
the Indian Ocean, the Arctic Ocean and the South Ocean. Of these, the Pacific is the 
largest ocean having an area of 60 crore and 60 lakh square kilometres. The average 
depth of the Pacific is the highest being about 4,270 metres. The Atlantic Ocean is the 
second largest ocean having an area of 8 crore and 24 lakh square kilometres although 
its place is third in respect of average depth. There are many semi-circles seas in the 
Atlantic having indented coastline. The Indian Ocean is about 7 crore and 36 lakh 
square kilometres in area and its average depth is 3,962 metres. The Arctic Ocean or 
the North Ocean surrounds the north pole. The southern part of this ocean is 
surrounded nearly all over by North America and Eurasia. The North Ocean is 1 crore 
and 50 lakh square kilometres in area and the average depth is 824 metres. The South 
Ocean is 1 crore 47 lakh square kilometres with average depth of 149 metres (Fig. 48). 
Table 2 : Area and average depth of the oceans. 
Oceans Area (square kilometres) Depth (metres) 
Pacific Ocean 16 crore 60 lakh 4,270 
Atlantic Ocean 8 crore 24 lakh 3,932 
Indian Ocean 7 crore 36 lakh 3,962 
North Ocean 1 crore 50 lakh 824 
South Ocean 1 crore 47 lakh 149
78	 Secondary Geography 
Definition of the ocean currents : The movement of water in a regular and fixed course 
from one part of the ocean to another gives rise to ocean currents. 
Causes of the ocean currents : The causes of the flow of the ocean currents are 
mentioned below : 
1. 	Wind movement; 
2. 	Difference of temperature; 
3. 	Difference of salinity; 
4. 	Difference of evaporation; 
5. 	Variation in depth; 
6. 	Rotation of the earth; 
7. 	Location of the landmass. 
Fig. 48 : Location of ocean in the world 
1. Wind movement : The strong and regular wind blows over the surface of the ocean to 
a particular direction. So the wind system is the major cause of the ocean currents. In the 
belts of the Trade Winds, ocean currents flow from the east to the west while in the 
westerly wind belts they flow from the west to the east (Fig. 49). 
HYDROSPHERE 
∞
The Hydrosphere	 79 
Fig. 49 : Impact of wind on ocean current 
Fig. 50 : Impact of evaporation and salinity 
in sea water 
2. Difference of temperature : The 
temperature of the surface water of the 
ocean is different in different latitudes. 
Strong heat in the equatorial and 
tropical regions causes the water to 
become warmer which in turn results in 
the expansion of the water in volume 
and thereby the water becomes lighter 
and the density also decreases. But in 
upper and mid-latitude regions, the 
water is heavy due to less heat. The hot 
and light water in the equatorial regions 
flows poleward as warm surface 
currents while the colder water from the 
poles creeps as under currents to fill the 
vaccum.	 
3. Difference of salinity : Density of 
water depends on the salinity. Water 
becomes lighter with the decrease of 
salinity while the water becomes 
heavier with the increase of salinity. 
Light water flows as surface currents 
while the heavy water flows as under 
current (Fig. 50). 
4. Differences of evaporation : Much 
evaporation occurs in the hot regions of 
the ocean resulting in the decrease of 
water level. Comparatively cold water 
from the neighbouring less hot areas of 
the ocean move towards more hot areas 
to maintain equilibrium in the ocean 
water. 	 
5. Variation in depth : The shallow ocean water becomes hot and light very quickly 
that causes up-rise of the warm water resulting in a downward flow of the cold water 
current to occupy the place of the warm water. As a result, of the upward and 
downward movement of the ocean water as currents are created.
80	 Secondary Geography 
6. Rotation of the earth : The earth rotates from west to east. As a result, the ocean 
currents are deflected to the right in the northern hemisphere and to the left in the 
southern hemisphere. 
7. Location of the landmass : Landmasses deflect the flow of ocean currents 
resulting in the formation of a new course. It is, for example, due to the Cape of Saint 
Rock in the east of Brazil that the South Equatorial current in the Atlantic Ocean is 
divided into two branches. One is flowing through the north coast of South America 
and the other through south-east coast. 
Various ocean currents : The ocean water does not remain stationary in one place. 
The water of all the oceans and seas are flowing either as surface or under current. 
Hence, the ocean currents are divided into three on the basis of the location of the 
oceans. These are : 
(a) 	The Atlantic Ocean Currents; 
(b) 	The Pacific Ocean Currents; 
(c) 	The Indian Ocean Currents. 
The Atlantic Ocean Currents : The continents of Europe and Africa are in the east 
of Atlantic while North America and South America are in the west. The equator has 
divided the Atlantic Ocean into north and south part. So, the currents can be divided 
into two parts. 
A. 	South Atlantic Ocean Currents; and 
B. 	North Atlantic Ocean Currents. 
A. South Atlantic Ocean Currents 
1. The Antarctic Current : The cold waters from the Antarctic move under the 
influence of the strong westerly wind from west to east. This is known as the 
Antarctic current and it enters into the Atlantic by the south of South America. 
2. Benguela Current : The branch of the Antarctic current being deflected near the 
Cape of Good Hope turns to the north and flows by the west side of South Africa. 
This current is known as the Benguela current. The current is cold since it comes from 
the cold current. It turns westward under the influence of the south-east trade winds 
and joins the South Equatorial current. 
3. South Equatorial Current : The South Equatorial Current originates from the 
extended part of the Benguela current. This current marches towards north-west upto
The Hydrosphere	 81 
the equator being influenced by the rotation of the earth and the south-east trade 
winds. This current is known as the South Equatorial Current as it flows to the south 
of the equator. This is warm current. 
4. Brazil Current : The branch of South Equatorial current known as Brazil current 
which flows through the east coast of Brazil to the south-west. The current is warm 
since it originates from the warm current and flows through the tropical region, 
crossing the Tropic of Capricorn, the current turns eastward gradually under the 
influence of westerly wind and meets the Antarctic current. 
5. Falkland Current : A branch of the Antarctic current on entering the Atlantic 
Ocean turns north and flows northward along the coast of Falkland Island and 
Argentina. This is known as Falkland Current and it is a cold current. 
B. North Atlantic Ocean Currents 
1. North Equatorial Current : The warm currents flowing from east to west along 
the north of the equator under the influence of the rotation of the earth and the northeast 
trade winds is known as the North Equatorial Current (Fig. 51). This is warm 
current. After crossing the Mid-Atlantic, the northern branch of the South Equatorial 
current meets the North Equatorial current. The North Equatorial current is divided 
into two branches. The first branch flows into the Gulf Stream taking a turn to the 
north. The second branch flows first into the Carribean Sea and then into the Gulf of 
Mexico. 
2. The Equatorial Counter Current : Between the North and South Equatorial 
currents, there is a weak current flowing from west to east is known as the Equatorial 
Counter Current. This is a warm current. 
3. The Gulf Stream : The Gulf Stream, practically, has originated from the extended 
part of South and North Equatorial currents. This mixed current enters into the 
Carribean Sea and is divided into two branches being obstructed by the islands. One 
of the branches enters into the Gulf of Mexico. The rush of water from the Mississippi 
river of the United States of America enhances the speed of this current and flows 
through the narrow strait of Florida to North Atlantic. It is known as the Gulf Stream 
since it has originated in the Gulf of Mexico. The extent of the Gulf Stream varies 
from 64 to 80 kilometres at the entrance of Florida strait, the depth is 914 metres, the 
average speed is 8 kilometres per hour and the temperature is 30∞ Celsius. The colour 
of the current is deep blue.
82	 Secondary Geography 
Fig. 51 : Current of Atlantic Ocean 
At the Mid-Atlantic, the depth and the temperature of the current comes down while 
the width gets increased and this current flows here at a speed of 2.5 kilometres per 
hour. While flowing north-east along the east coast of the United States of America, 
the Gulf Stream is divided into three branches at the mid of the North Atlantic due to 
the influence of the westerlies. 
(a) 	North Atlantic Stream; 
(b) 	West Greenland Current; and 
(c) 	Canaries Current.
The Hydrosphere	 83 
(a) North Atlantic Stream : The first branch of the Gulf Stream being called North 
Atlantic Stream flows along the coast of West Europe, the British Islands and Norway 
into the North Sea as a warm current. 
(b) West Greenland Current : The warm West Greenland current, the second branch 
of Gulf Stream curving northward proceeds along the south of Iceland and Greenland 
and then flows through Davis Strait between Greenland and Baffin Island to the north. 
(c) Canaries Current : The third branch of Gulf Stream known as the Canaries 
current turning southward flows along Portugal and the west coast of West Africa. The 
current is divided into two branches. The first branch curving south-west under the 
influence of Trade Wind flows into North Equatorial Current. This is a cold current. 
4. Guinea Current : The Guinea current, the second branch of Canaries Current, 
flows along the coast of Guinea of West Africa to the south upto the Equator. Then 
joining the Equatorial Counter Current, it flows into the Bay of Guinea. This is a cold 
current. 
The flow of different currents and cross currents along the sides of North Atlantic 
Ocean has caused in the centre of the ocean an area of stagnant sea often full of drifted 
branches of plants, grass, sea-weeds etc. and is called the Sargasso Sea (Fig. 51). 
5. Labrador Current : Two cold currents from the North Ocean flows along the east 
and west of Greenland into the Atlantic Ocean. These two currents join in the north of 
Labrador Peninsula and taking the name of the Labrador Currents. It flows along the 
east coast of Newfoundland and the United States of America to the south. The 
Labrador current flowing south to New York gets deflected by the warm Gulf Stream. 
The deep blue water of the Gulf Stream and the green water of the Labrador flow side 
by side in the opposite direction and the border of these two cross currents is called 
the Cold Wall. 
The impact of ocean currents on trade 
1. The ocean water in the mid-tropic and high tropic region freezes in winter. 
Naturally the mercantile ships cannot ply in those seas. But the warm current keeps 
the sea ports ice free where it enters the sea. This makes possible the free trafic of the 
commercial ships in the seas.
84	 Secondary Geography 
2. A ship can sail to a port of destination in a short time in favour of the current but it 
takes a lot of money, energy and time if the ship goes against the current. 
3. It is safe to sail ships in the passage of the warm currents. Cold currents bring 
icebergs. The ships are damaged if hit by an iceberg and sinks into the ocean. This 
way the Titanic ship sinks into the Atlantic Ocean. 
4. The icebergs that come floating with the cold current are quickly melted and the loads 
such as pebbles, sand, mud etc. are deposited on the sea bed creating shoals. Plenty of 
fish food is available in these shoal areas, and as such are good for fishing ground. 
Hydrosphere 
What we learnt from this chapter : 
Hydrosphere : The hydrosphere is the envelope of water which covers about 71 per 
cent of the surface of the earth. It covers an area of 36 crore and 25 lakh square 
kilometres. 
The land and waterbodies : The water area covers 71 per cent and land area covers 
29 per cent of the total area of the surface of the earth. 
The Oceans : The wide open mantle of water is called the Ocean. There are five 
oceans in the world namely, the Pacific Ocean, the Atlantic Ocean, the Indian Ocean, 
the North Ocean and the South Ocean. 
The area of the Oceans : The Pacific Ocean is 16 crore and 60 lakh square 
kilometres, the Atlantic Ocean is 8 crore and 24 lakh square kilometres, the Indian 
Ocean is 7 crore and 36 lakh square kilometres, the North Ocean is 1 crore and 50 
lakh square kilometres, and the South Ocean is 1 crore and 47 lakh square kilometres. 
The Ocean Currents : The movement of water from one part of the ocean to another 
in a regular and fixed course is known as ocean current. 
Ocean currents are of three types (1) The Atlantic Ocean Current, (2) The Pacific 
Ocean Current, and (3) The Indian Ocean Current. 
Warm current generally flows as surface current, while the cold current moves as 
under current. 
The causes of Ocean Currents : The wind system, the difference of temperature 
depth, salinity, evaporation, rotation of the earth and location of land area cause ocean 
currents. Of these factors, the wind system plays a vital role to create ocean currents. 
South Atlantic Ocean Currents : The South Atlantic Ocean currents flow towards 
left (leftward or anti-clockwise). The Antarctic current, Falkland current, Benguela 
current, South Equatorial current, and Brazil current flow into the Atlantic Ocean. 
The Hydrosphere	 85 
Among all these currents, the Antarctic current, Falkland and Benguela currents are 
cold currents and others are warm currents. 
North Atlantic Ocean Current : The currents of the North Atlantic Ocean are 
flowing towards right (southward or clockwise). The North Equatorial Current, the 
Gulf Stream, North Atlantic Stream, West Greenland Current, Canaries current, 
Guinea Current, Labrador Current, and Equatorial Counter Current are the principal 
currents of the North Atlantic Ocean. The Labrador, Canaries, and Guinea currents are 
cold currents. 
There are different currents and cross currents on the sides of North Atlantic Ocean 
and in the whirlpool of water in the centre, there is no current resulting in the deposit 
of moss and drifting weeds in the stagnant water. This is called the Sargasso Sea. 
The impact of the Ocean Currents : The seas in the high latitudes are frozen during 
winter and the mercantile ships cannot ply. Naturally, the commercial transactions are 
disturbed in the ports during winter on the high latitudes. But the seas where warm 
currents flow do not freeze in winter and mercantile ships can move freely. There are 
possibilities for the ships to get damaged by the icebergs that the cold currents bring. 
Exercise 
Multiple Choice Questions 
1.	What percentage of the surface of the earth is covered by the hydrosphere? 
	a. 30 	b . 45 
	c. 60 	d. 70 
2. 	How does salinity creates ocean current? 
	a. Density of w ater depends on the salinity 
	b . Saline water becomes very fast 
	c. There is a relation between salinity and wind movement 
	d. Saline w ater becomes lighter 
	
Answer question number 3 and 4 according to the table. 
Ocean Area (sq. kms.) Average Depth 
(metres) 
Pacific Ocean 16 crore 60 lakh 4270 
Indian Ocean 7 crore 36 lakh 3962 
Atlantic Ocean 8 crore 24 lakh 3932 
South Ocean l crore 47 lakh 149
86	 Secondary Geography 
3. 	Which ocean has many semi-circles seas? 
	a. P acific 	b . Indian 
	c. Atlantic 	d. South 
4. 	Which one is correct below? 
	a. 	The Pacific Ocean is two and a half time bigger than the Indian Ocean. 
	b . 	The Pacific Ocean is twice bigger than the Indian Ocean. 
	c. 	The Atlantic Ocean is one and a half time bigger than the Indian Ocean. 
	d. 	The Atlantic Ocean is twice bigger than the Indian Ocean. 
Creative Questions	 
1.			Anis and Shaheena has come on a trip to Coxís Bazar sea beach. While they were 
walking on the beach both of them noticed that the gigantic waves of the sea 
hitting at their feet. Shaheena states about the sea wave in responses to Anis, 
questions. Anis again asks, ‘Does the wind movement control this currentí? 
Shaheena replied that wind movement is the principal ingredient of almost all the 
current of the Seas and Oceans of the world. 
	a. 	What does Ocean current means? 
	b. 	Describe any other cause of the Ocean current occurrence other than the wind 
movement. 
	c. 	 Draw a map and indicate three currents of the Atlantic Ocean on it. 
	d. 	‘The wind movement is the principal cause of Ocean Current occurrenceí-- give 
argument in favour of this statement. 
	
The Hydrosphere	 87 
Part Three 
Regional Geography 
A region is a wide area having some universally accepted homogeneous character. 
The purpose of the regiorn concept is to distinguish similar regions making them clear 
and well arranged from adjacent regions on some particular basis. The term ‘region’ is 
of course, used in a wide sense. Regions are classified into different types such as, 
physical region, political region, cultural region etc. Hill, mountains, plateaus, plains, 
rivers, lakes, seas are studied in the physical regions. All these are gifts of nature 
having no roles for human beings to play. On the other hand, the political regions 
(Fig. 52) are the borders of different countries and soverign area of government. The 
cultural region is based on culture of human beings. In the same manner, industrial 
region is the accumulation of a number of man-made factories that produce a number 
of products. So political regions, cultural regions and industrial regions are based on 
particular ideas. 

88	 Secondary Geography 
Fig. 52 : The political region of the world
The Hydrosphere	 89 
Chapter One 
The Continent of Europe 
Location : The continent of Europe is located between 35∞ to 71∞ North latitude and 
25∞ West longitude to 66∞ East longitude. 20∞ East longitude and 55∞ North latitude 
has passed the middle of the continent. The continent has the North Sea to its north, 
the Mediterranean Sea and Black Sea to its south, the Caspian Sea and Asia to its east 
and the North Atlantic Ocean to its west. The Ural mountain has seperated Europe 
from Asia. 
Area : Europe ranks third among all the continents in respect of its area. The area of 
Europe is only 2,32,27,496 square kilometres. It is about 0.24 part smaller than Asia 
in area, 0.35 part of Africa, 0.43 part of North America and 0.59 part of South 
America while it is 1.37 times larger than Australia and 7.45 times larger than 
Antarctica. 
Coastline : In comparison to its size, Europe has a very long and broken coastline. 
The coastline is 41,204 kilometres i.e.1kilometre of coastline for every 242 kilometres 
of its area. In many places, there are inland, seas and bays and gulfs so that no part of 
Europe is more than 1,690 kilometres from the sea. This has resulted in the formation 
of many natural harbours and ports along the coast. There are many peninsulas, 
islands archipelagoes along the coast of this continent. In the north coast, the majors 
ones among others are White Sea, Bothnia Peninsula, Baltic Sea, North Sea, Iceland 
Island, Scandinavian Peninsula (Norway and Sweden) and Denmark Peninsula. 
Besides, there are Novaya Zemlya and Pittsburgen Island, North Cape and Northkin 
Cape. In the west coast, there are Bay of Biscay and the Iberian Peninsula (Spain and 
Portugal). In the south coast, there are Mediterranean Sea, Gulf of Genoa, Tyrrhenean 
Sea, Adriatic Sea, Ionian Sea, Aegean Sea, Sea of Marmara, Black Sea, Azov Sea, 
Balearic group of Islands, Corsica Islands, Sardina Island, Sicily Island, Italian 
Peninsula, Ionian Archipelago, Balkan Peninsula and Crimean Peninsula. As the 
continent of Asia is located in the east, there is only Caspian Sea surrounded by land 
on all sides. 
Physiography : Europe is divided into four divisions on the basis of its physical 
structures (Fig. 53). 
1. The Rocky Plateau of North-West Europe; 
2. The great plain of Central Europe; 
3. The plateau of Central and West Europe; and 
4. The mountainous lands of South Europe.
90	 Secondary Geography 
1. The Rocky Plateau of North-West Europe : The Scandinavian Peninsula 
(Norway and Sweden), the northern part of Scotland and Ireland are included in this 
region. In the past, this region was consisted of old metamorphic rocks. Owing to their 
long exposure to the external agents of denudation, these ancient rocks have been 
worn down to form plateau. The Kiolen mountain is in the north Scandinavian plateau 
and the Dover Field mountain is in the south. The landmass of this region slopes to 
the south-east. The rift valley of Glenmore has divided the Scotland plateau into two 
parts. The north part of the United Kingdom is known as the Scottish Highland, while 
the southern part is Graspian range of mountains. Nevis (1,344 metres) of Graspian 
mountain is the highest peak in the United Kingdom. 
2. The Great Plain of Central Europe : This great plain stretches from the coast of 
the Bay of Biscay in the west to the eastern border of Europe in the east. In fact, this 
plain has joined the plains of Asia and formed the greatest plain in the world. The 
plain includes North France, Belgium, Netherlands (Holand), Germany, Poland, 
Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Belarus, Ukrain and most of the places of Russia. 
The surface in this plain is mostly flat and in most cases is not more than 152 metres 
above sea level. Much of the surface of the lowlands is covered by glacial deposits 
and moraines because the glaciers moved over this area. 
Fig. 53 : Physiography of Europe
The Continent of Europe	 91 
3. The plateau of Central and West Europe : The region is formed of five small and 
big diffused plateaus. This region includes Meseta plateau of Iberia, Central Meseta 
Plateau of France, Bavaria, Plateau of Germany and Bohemia Plateau of Czech and 
Slovakia. 
4. The Mountainous Lands of South Europe : The Alps Mountain is situated at the 
central place of this mountainous lands. The Alps Mountain is about 1,116 kilometres 
long and in width it varies from 56 to 64 kilometres. A number of branches from this 
mountain have spreaded to the different directions of South Europe. The Dinaric and 
Pindus mountain in the south-east of Balkan Peninsula, Balkan mountain in the east of 
the Dinaric, the Republican of Czech and Slovakia to the east of the Alps, the 
Carpethian mountain covering West Ukraine and the central east of Romania, the 
Transylvania mountain in South Romania, the Caucasus mountain, Jura mountain and 
Vosges mountain to the east of Black Sea are all determining the border of France, 
Switzerland and Germany. The Evergen and the Siveneze mountains are located in 
South France. The Mount Blank (4,807 metres) situated in the border of South-East 
France and Italy, is the highest peak. This peak remains under ice throughout the year. 
The Meseta plateau of Spain is situated in the highlands of Pyrenees in the border of 
France and Spain, in the highlands of the Cantabrian Mountain in North Spain and the 
Sierra Nevada in South Spain. The Apennines, a branch of the Alps has passed 
through Italy towards south. 
The Hungary Plain is located in the river valley of Daniube within the Carpethian and 
the Dinaric Mountains, the Lombarde Plain in between the Alps and the Apennines, 
and the Romania plain between the Balkan and the Transylvania mountains. Visuvius 
of Italy, Etna of Sicily, Strombly of Lepery Island and Hekla of Iceland are the notable 
volcanoes of Europe. 
Climate : Europe is situated at the Temperate Zone. Difference in climate is found to 
occur in different places of Europe due to the distance from the sea, influence of warm 
currents, location of the Arctic circle, and the mountains etc. On the basis of the 
mentioned situations, the climate of Europe is divided into four climatic regions (Fig. 54). 
1. The Tundra Climatic Regions : This climatic region is included in the Frizid zone 
as the northern parts of Norway, Finland and Russia being situated in the north of the 
Arctic circle, and this type of climate is known as the Tundra Climate. The winter 
season is long and the intensity of winter is very high. There is a heavy snowfall in 
this season and the surface remains covered with snow for about nine months of the 
year. 
2. The Temperate Climate of North-West Europe : The countries in this region are 
those located along the coast of the Atlantic Ocean in the north-western Europe that 
include Norway, southern part of Sweden, Germany, France, northern part of Spain, 
92	 Secondary Geography 
Belgium, Netherlands, Luxembourg, Denmark, the United Kingdom and Iceland. The 
climate of this region is equable as the warm North Atlantic Stream flow along this 
region and no place is far off from the ocean. The amount of rainfall is higher more 
during winter but the intensity of winter cold is not much. 
Fig. 54 : Climatic region of Europe 
3. The Continental Climate of East Europe : This climatic region include Poland, 
Southern Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Romania, Belarus, Ukraine, Georgia, 
Armenia, and Azerbaijan of East Europe. The region is far from the sea. The cold 
wind of the north blows over these countries. The intensity of cold during winter is 
very high. It rains a little under the influence of westerly wind during summer, but in 
the east the rainfall gradually decreases. So the climate of this region is called 
Extreme Continental Climate. 
4. The Mediterranean Climatic Region : This region includes Portugal, South 
Spain, South France, Italy, Albania, Greece, the European Turkey, the Mediterranean 
Islands, Corsica, Sardinia, Sicily and Crete of South Europe not far from the 
Mediterranean Sea. Though there is scorching sun during summer but the temperature 
remains less due to the influence of the sea. The intensity of cold during winter is not 
felt high. There is rainfall in winter but the summer goes dry. 
Tundra Climatic Region 
Temperate Climatic Region 
Continental Climatic Region 
Mediterranean Climatic 
Region 
CLIMATIC REGION OF EUROPE
The Continent of Europe	 93 
Political divisions and population : There are 46 large and small states in Europe 
(Fig. 55). The former Soviet Union broke up in 1991 giving rise to 15 independent 
Republican States. Similarly former Czechoslovakia formed two states such as, Czech 
Fig. 55 : Political division of Europe
94	 Secondary Geography 
and Slovakia after break up and Yugoslavia formed 5 states. A table showing areas and 
population of different countries is given below : 
Table 3 : Area, population, density and capitals of different countries of Europe, 2010 
 
Name of the country Area 
(sq. kms.) 
Population 
(in crore) 
Density of 
population 
Capital 
(a) North-West Region 
Norway 
Sweden 
United Kingdom 
Ireland 
Iceland 
3,23,802 
4,49,964 
2,44,820 
70,280 
1,03,000 
0.49 
0.94 
6.22 
0.45 
0.03 
15 
21 
2541 
64 
3 
Oslo 
Stockholm 
London 
Dublin 
Reykjavik 
(b) Baltic Region 
Finland 
Estonia 
Latvia 
Lithuania 
3,38,145 
45,226 
64,589 
65,200 
0.54 
0.13 
0.22 
0.33 
16 
29 
34 
51 
Helsinki 
Tallinn 
Riga 
Vilnius 
(c) The Plains 
Netherlands 
Belgium 
Luxembourg 
France 
Denmark 
Germany 
Poland 
41,526 
30,528 
2,586 
6,43,427 
43,094 
3,57,021 
3,12,685 
1.66 
1.08 
0.05 
6.30 
0.55 
8.16 
3.82 
400 
354 
193 
98 
128 
229 
122 
Amsterdam 
Brussels 
Luxembourg 
Paris 
Copenhagen 
Barlin 
Warsaw 
(d) Eastern Region 
Russia 
Belarus 
Ukraine 
Moldova 
1,70,75,200 
2,07,000 
6,03,700 
33,843 
14.19 
0.95 
4.59 
0.41 
8 
46 
76 
121 
Moscow 
Minsk 
Kiev 
Chisinau 
(e) Trans-Caucasia Region 
Georgia 
Armenia 
Azerbaijan 
69,700 
29,800 
86,600 
0.46 
0.31 
0.90 
66 
104 
104 
Tbilisi 
Yerevan 
Baku 
(per. sq. kms.)
The Continent of Europe	 95 
Name of the country Area 
(sq. kms.) 
Population 
(in crore) 
Density of 
population 
Capital 
(f) Central and southern 
Region 
Czech Republic 
Slovakia 
Romania 
Hungary 
Austria 
Liechtenstein 
Switzerland 
Portugal 
Spain 
Andorra 
Italy 
Vatican City* 
Monaco 
San Marino 
Slovenia 
Croatia 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Serbia 
Macedonia 
Albania 
Bulgaria 
Greece 
Malta 
78,866 
48,845 
2,37,500 
93.030 
83,870 
160 
41,290 
92,391 
5,04,782 
468 
3,01,230 
0.18
2 
61 
20,273 
56,542 
91,129 
77,474 
25,333 
28,748 
1,10,910 
1,31,940 
316 
1.05 
0.54 
2.15 
1.00 
0.84 
0.004 
0.78 
1.07 
4.71 
0.01 
6.05 
0.0000648 
0.004 
0.003 
0.21 
0.44 
0.38 
0.73 
0.21 
0.32 
0.75 
1.13 
0.04 
133 
111 
91 
107 
100 
225 
189 
116 
93 
216 
201 
3600 
35835 
492 
104 
78 
42 
94 
83 
111 
68 
86 
1266 
Prague 
Bratislava 
Bucharest 
Budapest 
Vienna 
Vaduz 
Bern 
Lisbon 
Madrid 
Andorra 
La Vella 
Rome 
Vatican City 
Monaco 
San Marino 
Ljubljana 
Zagreb 
Sarajevo 
Belgrade 
Skoplje 
Tirana 
Sofia 
Athens 
Valletta 
Total 2,32,27,496 75.24 32 ----- 
Source : World Population Data Sheet, 2010 
* Statistical Yearbook, 1994-95 
(per. sq. km s.)
96	 Secondary Geography 
Europe 
What we learnt from this chapter : 
Location, Area and Coastline : Europe is located in the temperate zone. The area of 
Europe is about 2,32,27,496 square kilometres. The coastline of Europe is very much 
broken and long. 
Physiography : Europe can be divided into four regions according to its physical 
structures such as (1) The Mountainous Plateau of North-West Europe, (2) The Great 
Plain of Central Europe, (3) The Plateau of Central and West Europe, and (4) The 
Mountainous Plain of South Europe. 
Climate : The climate of Europe is divided into four types such as (1) The Tundra 
Climatic Region, (2) The Temperate Climatic Region of North-West Europe, (3) The 
Continental Climatic Region of East Europe, and (4) The Mediterranean Climatic Region. 
The Political Divisions : The continent of Europe is consisted of 46 small and large 
states. In the north-west region, there are Norway, Sweden, United Kingdom, Iceland 
and Ireland, Finland, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania in the Baltic Region. Belgium, 
Netherlands, Luxembourg, France, Denmark, Germany and Poland in the plains. In 
the eastern region, there are European Russia, Belarus, Ukraine and Moldova; in the 
Trans Caucasian region there are Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan; in central 
European region there are Czech, Slovakia, Romania; Hungary, Austria, and 
Switzerland; and in the Mediterranean region there are Portugal, Spain, Italy, Vatican 
City, San Marino, Albania, Greece and Malta. 
Exercise 
Multiple Choice Questions 
1. 	Which one of these below is the Scandinavian Capital? 
	a. London, Dublin and Edinb urgh 		b . Stockholm, Oslo and Helsinki 
	c. P aris, Brussels and Bonn 		 	d. Prague, Bucharest and Vienna 
2. 	Which of the European Country below is enjoying the Continental Climate? 
	a. Denmark 		 	 	 	b . Portugal 
	c. Turkey 	 	d. Geor gia 
3.	The v arieties of climates of different parts of Europe mainly contributes 
	i. The latitude of Europe is between 35∞ North to 71∞ North 
	ii. The longitude is 25∞ West to 66∞ East 
	iii. The differences of the physical structures in different parts of Europe 
	 Which one is correct below? 
	a. i and ii 	 	 	 	 	b . ii and iii 
	c. i and iii 	 	d. i, ii and iii
The Continent of Europe	 97 
Countries Area (sq. kms.) Population (in crore) 
Norway 3,23,802 0.49 
Netherlands 41,526 1.66 
Notice the table and answer question number 4, 5 and 6. 
		 
	Sour ce : World Population Data Sheet, 2010 
4. 	What is the Population of the Netherlands per square kilometre? 
	a. 307 		 	 	 	 	b . 337 
	c. 367 		 	d. 397 
5. 	Which one is the reasonable cause of the density of less population in Norway 	 
	though the ar ea is a vast one? 
a. The country is mountainous and its climate is extreme. 
b. Six months day and six months night throughout the year. 
c. It is underdeveloped in industrialization in comparison to other countries. 
d. The influence of the warm by current. 
6.	In which part of Eur ope the countries are located as stated in the table? 
	a. North-W est		 	 	 	b . South-West 
	c. South-East 	d. North-East 
Creative Questions 
1. 	Reaching in London from Dhaka, Sadib began to tremble in biting-cold at the 
outside of the airport. He got some idea about the weather of this country from 
his expatriate friends. The difference in weather is found to occur in Europe 
though it is located at the temperate zone due to the distance from the sea, 
influence of warm currents, location of the Arctic Circle and the mountains etc. 
a. 		How many regions the climate of the Europe is divided? 
b. 		In which climate zone does the city of London situated? 
c. 		Draw the map of Europe and identify and describe the Mediterranean region. 
d. 		‘In Europe the difference in climate is found to occur though it is situated in 
							the Temperate Zone’-- give reasons in favour of the statement.
98	 Secondary Gerography 
Chapter Two 
The Continent of Asia 
Location : We live in the continent of Asia. Bangladesh is located in this continent. 
Asia lies between 10∞ South latitude to 80∞ North latitude and 25∞ East longitude to 
170∞ West longtitude. The Pacific Ocean is in the east of this continent, Europe and 
the Mediterranean Sea in the west, Africa and the Red Sea in the south-west, the 
North Ocean in the north while the Indian Ocean in the south. Europe and Asia are 
jointly called Eurasia since they are connected by land. Only the Ural Mountain, the 
Ural river and the Caspian Sea have seperated Europe from Asia. 
Area : Asia is the largest continent of the world. Its area is 4,64,91,180 square 
kilometres. This continent is 8,528 kilometres from north to south while in east to 
west it is 9,654 kilometres. The continent of Asia is 1.5 times larger than Africa, 1.82 
times than North America, 2.4 times than South America, 4.19 times than Europe, 
5.73 times than Auatralia and 3.12 times than Antarctica. 
Fig. 56 : Continent of Asia in the world map 
Coastline : The coastline of Asia is not very much indented. Naturally, the coastline is 
much shorter in comparison to its area. The total coastline is 57,924 kilometres that 
means it has 1 kilometre coastline per 773 square kilometres. The number of the 
developed sea ports is much less since the coastline is very short. 
Physiography : Asia can be divided into five divisions according to its physical 
structures.
The Continent of Asia	 99 
1. The low plains of North Asia : If we draw a straight line from the Bering strait to 
the south of the Caspian Sea, we shall see a great low land to its north. This plain has 
gradually sloped to the north. 
2. The highlands of Central Asia and the mountains : The height of Pamir, a 
plateau in Central Asia is 4,813 metres and it is called the ‘roof of the world’ since it is 
the highest plateau. The plateau is called the Pamir Knot, because different mountain 
ranges radiate from Pamir Knot to different directions. The Tien Shan Mountains have 
stretched towards north-east direction from here. Of the ranges of this mountain, Altai, 
Yablonovy and Stanovoi are the major ranges. The Karakoram lies in the south-west 
of the Kunlun running towards east from the Pamir and the Himalayan Mountains in 
the south (Fig. 57). The Tarim plateau is situated between the Altyntag Mountains and 
the Tien Shan and the plateau of Tibet lies between the Himalayan Mountain and 
Kunlun. The Himalayas is the highest mountain in the world. It is about 2,414 
kilometres long and 241 to 402 kilometres wide. The Mount Everest (8,884 metres) is 
the highest peak. 
Fig. 57 : Physiography of Asia 
Besides, there are about 22 such peaks whose height will not exceed 6,016 metres. K2 
or Godwin Austin (8,619 metres) of Karakoram Mountain is the second highest peak 
in the world. Few branches from the east end of the Himalayas turning towards south 
passed through Myanmar as the Arakan Yomas and Pegu Yomas. 
Low Land of Siberia 
Plant 
Ledochina Plateau
100	 Secondary Geography 
Two mountain ranges viz., Hindu Kush extending towards south from Pamir Knot and 
the other one towards south-west as Sulaiman and Khirthar. The Elburz mountain of 
north Iran and the Zagros mountain of south Iran have joined the Armenian Knot to 
the west. The Iranian Plateau is located in between these two mountains. The 
mountains of Pontic and Taurus originating from the Armenian Knot extend towards 
west. The plateau of Anatolia is between these two mountains. 
3. The low plains of South Asia : The deposits of alluvial soil by the rivers of Tigris 
(Dazla) and Euphrates (Forat) basin of Iraq, Indus-Ganges-Brahmaputra basin of 
Pakistan, India and Bangladesh and Hwang Ho-Yangtze-Sikiang basin of China have 
developed this plain. Tigris and Euphrates plain slope towards south-east, the Indus 
basin towards south-west, the Ganges basin towards east, the Brahmaputra basin 
initially towards south-west then towards the south. The alluvial soil has made this 
plain very fertile. 
4. The Plateau of South Asia : The Arab, Deccan and Indo-China plateau of the 
southern part of Asia is formed of old rocks. Most of the area of the wide Arab Plateau 
is barren and sandy and this plateau slopes to the east. The West Ghat Mountain is 
situated to the west of the Deccan plateau, East Ghat Mountain in the east and 
Vindhya range in the north. This plateau slopes to the east while the Indo-China 
Plateau slopes to the south. 
5. The Volcanic Islands : Forming ‘festoons’ down the east coast of Asia, there are 
rocky islands of Aleutian, Kurile, Japan, Riukieu, the Philippines and Borneo. Most of 
these islands are adorned with volcanoes. 
Rivers : According to the flow, the four great river systems of Asia are as follows : 
(a) Rivers flowing to the North Sea : The Obb (with tributary Irtish 5,569 
kilometres) and the Yenisey (with tributary Angara 4,989 kilometres) rising from the 
Altai Mountains and Lena originating from the lake Baikal (4,264 kilometres) flow to 
the North Sea. The mouth of the rivers remain frozen most of the time of the year. 
(b) Rivers flowing to the Pacific Ocean : The Amur river (4,344 kilometres) 
originating from Yablonovy Mountain has flowed to the Orkhotosk Sea in the east. 
This river remains frozen for six months of the year. The Hwang Ho (4,668 
kilometres) rises from the Kunlun Mountains and has fallen into the Yellow Sea. The 
Yangtzekiang (5,525 kilometres) originating in the Tibet Plateau has fallen into the 
East China Sea. Yangtze is the longest river in Asia. The Sikiang rises from Yuanan 
Plateau of China and flows to the South China Sea. The Mekong river and the Menam 
both rise from the Tibet Plateau, have fallen into the South China Sea and to the Bay 
of Thailand respectively. 
(c) Rivers flowing to the Indian Ocean : The Salwin (2,816 kilometres) river of 
Myanmar originating from the Tibet Plateau has fallen into the Bay of Martaban. The 
Irrawaddy (2,092 kilometres) rises from the Naga Mountains and flows through 
Myanmar falls into the Bay of Martaban. The Brahmaputra (2,896 kilometres) rises 
from lake Manash of Tibet and mingles with the Ganges flows through Tibet, Assam 
The Continent of Asia	 101 
and Bangladesh. The Ganges (2,505 kilometres) rising from the glacier ‘Gangotree’ 
flows to the Bay of Bengal through India and Bangladesh. The lower part of the river 
is known as the Padma. The Indus (2,896 kilometres) rises from the Himalayas and 
flows to the Arabian Sea through Kashmir and Pakistan. The Tigris (Dazla, 1,900 
kilometres) and the Euphrates (Forat) rise in the highlands of Armenia in East Turkey. 
The combined course of these two rivers is known as Shat-el-Arab and flows into the 
Bay of Persia. 
(d) Rivers flowing into the lakes : The Amudarya and Sirdarya rising from the Pamir 
plateau and Tien Shan mountain respectively fall into the Aral Lake, while the Ural 
river, coming up from the Ural mountains flows to the Caspian Sea, the Tarim river 
(2,735 kilometres) to the Lapnor Lake from the Karakoram Mountains, the Helmond 
river from the Hindu Kush mountains to the Hamun and the Jordan river from the 
highlands of Lebanon to the Dead Sea. Besides, many small rivers from the different 
parts of the continent of Asia have flowed to different directions. 
Climate : Asia, being a large continent, has diverse physical features. The barriers to 
the free flow of air current have created different climates in different areas. 
According to the prevailing climate, the continent can be divided into seven climatic 
zones (Fig. 58). 
1. Equatorial Climatic Zone : The equatorial type of climate is found in Singapore, 
Malaysia Peninsula and Indonesia within 5∞ North and 5∞ South latitudes. The 
termperature here is high and heavy shower occurs throughout the year. The variation 
of temperature between winter and summer is less. 
Fig. 58 : Climatic region of Asia
102	 Secondary Geography 
2. The Monsoon Climatic Zone : The countries in the Tropical zone and the eastern 
part of Asia are included in this climatic zone. The countries included are South and East 
China, the Philippines, Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, Thailand, Myanmar, Bangladesh, 
India, Sri Lanka and Pakistan. Heavy rains occur during summer and the rains make the 
summer cooler. Neither summer nor winter is extreme here. The climate is warm and 
wet. 
3. The Desert Climatic Zone : The prominence of dryness in this type of climate is 
the major characteristics. Less growth of vegetation is found here due to no rainfall or 
less rainfall and the prevalence of drought. This type of climate is divided into two. 
(a) Hot Desert Climatic Region : This climate includes the Thar Desert of Pakistan 
and India, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Oman, Yemen, Saudi Arabia, Jordan and 
South-West Iran. Here the climate is extreme. Extreme hot during day and very cold 
during night is found to prevail here. 
(b) Cold Desert Climatic Region : This type of climate includes Mongolia of Central 
Asia, Sinkiang of China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, 
Afghanistan, and Iran. These regions experience less rainfall being far away from the 
ocean. The air of this region is dry due to less amount of rainfall. The climate of this 
region is cold due to height. The Gobi desert is located in Mongolia and Sinkiang of the 
cold and dry climatic region. 
4. The Mediterranean Climatic Zone : This climatic zone includes Turkey, Syria, 
Lebanon, Palestine, Israel, and North Iraq of West Asia. Here rain falls in winter and 
the summer goes dry. 
5. The Continental Climatic Zone : The climate of West Siberia is extreme. Winter 
is very cold here and there is heavy snowfall. Summer is hot but short. There is 
scarcely any rainfall. 
6. The Cold Temperate Climatic Zone : This climate is found in East Siberia. 
Winter is extreme here. Extreme cold wind flows from the Arctic in winter. There is 
snowfall instead of rainfall. The eastern part is colder and drier than the western part. 
7. The Tundra Climatic Zone : This climate is found in the north of Siberia. Winter 
is very long here and cold is very extreme. Verkhoyansk in Siberia is the coldest place 
in the world. The snow in the north of Tundra does not melt even in summer. This area 
is unfit for human habitation.
The Continent of Asia 103 
Political division and population : The states of Asia have been divided into five 
regions for the sake of discussion such as (1) The SAARC countries, (2) South-East 
Asia, (3) Far East and Siberia, (4) Central Asia and (5) South-West Asia. The area 
under SAARC, a forum for the development of South Asia regional countries is 
52,21,391 square kilometres and more than 159.90 crore people live hi this region. All 
the seven states are independent and sovereign and help each other for mutual 
development. 
There are 11 states in South-East Asia with a total area of 45,10,560 square kilometres 
and population of 59.70 crore. Each of the states is independent and sovereign. 
There are 8 states in the Far East and Siberia. The total area of these countries is 
2,65,71,415 square kilometres with a total population of 158.01 crore. 
The total area of five countries in Central Asia is 39,94,400 square kilometres and the 
population is 6.25 crore. 
The total area of the 16 states of South-West Asis is 61,93,414 square kilometres and 
the population is 29.36 crore. 
The Soviet Union broke up in 1991 creating 15 sovereign states. Of these, the 
countries included in Asia are (1) Siberia (the part of the Republic of Russia in Asia), 
(2) Kazakhstan, (3) Uzbekistan, (4) Turkmenistan, (5) Tajikistan, and (6) Kyrgyzstan. 
In 1993 some parts of Israel in the Middle East have been given self-rule status in the 
name of Palestine. 
Table 4 : Area, population, density of population and capitals of different countries of 
Asia, 2010 
Name of the country Area 
(sq. kms.) 
Population 
(in crore) 
Density of 
population 
(per sq. kms.) 
Capital 
1. SAARC Countries 
Bangladesh* 
India 
Pakistan 
Nepal 
Bhutan 
Sri Lanka 
Maldives. 
Afghanistan 
1,47,570 
32,87,590 
8,03,940 
1,47,181 
47,000 
65,610 
75,000 
6,47,500 
14.66 
118.88 
18.48 
2.80 
0.07 
2.07 
0.03 
2.91 
993 
362 
230 
190 
15 
315 
1070 
45 
Dhaka 
New Delhi 
Islamabad 
Kathmandu 
Thimphu 
Colombo 
Male 
Kabul 
Total 52,21,391 159.90 349 æ 
104	 Secondary Geography 
Source : * Bangladesh Statistical Pocketbook, 2009/February 2010 
**Statistical Yearbook, 1994-95 
Name of the country Area Population Density of Capital 
(sq. kms.) (in crore) population 
(per sq. kms.) 
1. South-East Asia 
Myanmar 
Thailand 
Cambodia 
Laos 
Vietnam 
Indonesia 
Malaysia 
Singapore 
Philippines 
Brunei 
Timor Leste 
(East-Timor) 
6,78.500 
5,14,000 
1,81,040 
2,36,800 
3,29,560 
19,19,440 
3,29,750 
693 
3,00,000 
5,770 
15,007 
5.34 
6.81 
1.51 
0.64 
8.89 
23.55 
2.89 
0.51 
9.40 
0.04 
0.12 
79 
132 
83 
27 
270 
123 
88 
7359 
313 
69 
80 
Pyinmana 
Bangkok 
Phnom Penh 
Vientiane 
Hanoi 
Jakarta 
Kuala Lumpur 
Singapore 
Manila 
Bandar Seri 
Begawan 
Dili 
Total 45,10,560 59.70 132 ----- 
3. Far East and 
Siberia 
Siberia (Asian part 
of Russia**) 
Japan 
North Korea 
South Korea 
Mongolia 
China 
Hong Kong 
Taiwan 
1,47,74,460 
3,77,835 
1,20,540 
1,00,03 2 
15,64,116 
95,96,960 
1,092 
35,980 
0.99 
12.74 
2.28 
4.89 
0.28 
133.81 
0.70 
2.32 
67 
337 
189 
489 
2 
139 
6410 
645 
----- 
Tokyo 
Pyongyang 
Seoul 
Ulanbatar 
Beijing 
Victoria 
Taipei 
Total 2,65,71,415 158.01 59 ---- 
4. Central Asia 
Kazakhstan 
Uzbekistan 
Turkmenistan 
Tajikistan 
Kyrgyzstan 
27,17,300 
4,47,400 
4,88,100 
1,43,100 
1,98,500 
1.63 
2.81 
0.52 
0.76 
0.53 
6 
63 
11 
53 
27 
Astana 
Tashkent 
Ashgabat 
Dushanbe 
Bishkek 
Total 39,94,400 6.25 16 ---- 
The Continent of Asia	 105 
Source : World Population Data Sheet, 2010 .MPND, 2004 
Asia 
What we learnt from this chapter : 
Location and area : Asia is the largest continent of the world. North Sea is in the 
north of Asia, while the Indian Ocean is in the south and the Pacific in the east, the 
continent of Europe and the Mediterranean Sea in the west and Africa and the Red 
Sea in the south-west. The total area of Asia is 4,64,91,180 square kilometres. 
Physiography : The continent of Asia is divided into five regions according to its 
physical structures as follows : 
(1) The low plains of North Asia, (2) The high plateau of Central Asia and the 
mountains, (3) The low plains of South Asia, (4) The plateaus of South Asia, (5) The 
Volcanic Islands. Pamir and Armenia are the two mountain Knots from where the 
Name of the country Area 
(sq, kms.) 
Population 
(in crore) 
Density of 
population 
(per sq. kms.) 
Capital 
5. South-West Asia 
Iran 
Iraq 
Turkey 
Syria 
Lebanon 
Jordan 
Israel 
Palestine 
Yemen 
Saudi Arabia 
United Arab Emirates 
Bahrain 
Qatar 
Oman 
Kuwait 
Cyprus 
16,48,000 
4,37,072 
7,80,580 
1,85,180 
10,400 
92,300 
20,770 
6,220 
5,27,970 
21,49,690 
83,600 
665 
11,437 
2,12,460 
17,820 
9,250 
7.51 
3.15 
7.36 
2.25 
0.43 
0.65 
0.76 
0.40 
2.36 
2.92 
0.54 
0.13 
0.17 
0.31 
0.31 
0.11 
46 
72 
94 
122 
413 
70 
366 
643 
45 
14 
65 
1955 
149 
15 
174 
119 
Tehran 
Baghdad 
Ankara 
Damascus 
Beirut 
Amman 
Jerusalem 
Ramallah 
Sanaa 
Riyadh 
Abu Dhabi 
Manama 
Doha 
Muscat 
Kuwait 
Nicosia 
Total 61,93,414 29.36 47 ---- 
Grand Total 4,64,91,180 413.22 89 ---- 
106	 Secondary Geography 
mountains run to different directions. Pamir is called ‘Roof of the World’, because of 
its height. The Tien Shan, Altai, Yablonovy, Stanovoi, Kunlun, Karakoram, the 
Himalayas, Hindu Kush, Sulaiman, Khirthar, Elburz, Zagros, Pontic and Taurus are 
the important mountains. Tibet, Tarim, Iran, Anatolia, Arabia, Deccan, Indo-China are 
the principal plateaus and Siberia, Tigris-Euphrates, Indus-Ganges-Brahmaputra, 
Hwang Ho-Yangtze-Sikiang are the principal plains in Asia. 
Rivers : The Obb, Yenisey, Lena of North Asia; Amur, Hwang Ho, Yangtze-Sikiang of 
East Asia; Mekong, Manum, Salwin, Irrawaddy, Brahmaputra, Ganges, Indus of South 
Asia are the main rivers of Asia. 
Climate : Asia being very large and wide, has diverse climates in different regions 
and it can be divided into seven climatic zones as follows : 
(1) The Equatorial Climate, (2) The Monsoon Climate, (3) The Desert Climate, (4) 
The Mediterranean Climate, (5) The Cold Temperate Climate, and (6) The Tundra 
Climate. 
Political divisions : There are 48 states in Asia. Out of these (a) Eight countries of 
South Asia included in Regional Development of South Asia (SAARC), and (b) 
eleven countries of South East-Asia, (c) eight countries of Far East and Siberia, (d) 
five countries of Central Asia, and (e) sixteen countries of South-West Asia are also 
included. 
Exercise 
Multiple Choice Questions 
Answer question number 1 to 4 as per the table above. 
1.	Which country below is 2nd in area? 
	a. Bangladesh 	 	 	b . Myanmar 
	c. India 	d. Afghanistan 
Countries Area 
(sq. km.) 
Population 
(in crore) 
Bangladesh 1,47,570 14.66 
Myanmar 6,78,500 5.34 
India 32,87,590 118.88 
Afghanistan 6,47,500 2.91
The Continent of Asia	 107 
2.	Which country is less populated in density? 
	a. Bangladesh 	 	 	 	b . Myanmar 
	c. India 	 	d. Afghanistan 
3.	The density of the population is seen differ ent though the countries in the 	 
	table ar e located in the same continent-- 
	a. Because of equable climate 
	b . Because of extreme climate and diversified earth 
	c. Because of cultural dif ference 
	d. Because of geographical location 
4. 	In which part of Asia the countries are located as stated in the table? 
	a. East 	 	 	 	 	b . West 
	c. North 	 	d. South 
In the table the information of two countries are shown. Use the data from the 
table and answer question number 5 and 6. 
Population and export information, South Korea and Bangladesh, 2001 
5.	Which one is corr ect as per the date noted in the year 2001? 
	i. The total population of Bangladesh was half more than South Korea 
	ii. The export price of South Korea per capita was one-fifth of Bangladesh 
	iii. The density of population of South Korea is half less than Bangladesh 
	 Which one is correct below? 
	a. i and ii 	 	 	 	 	b . i and iii 
	c. ii and iii 		d. i, ii and iii 
6. 	Which inf ormation can be gathered out from the table mentioned? 
	i. 	Export price 
	ii. 	Area of both countries 
	iii. 	The change of xeport income in comparison with the previous year 
	 Which one is correct below? 
	a. i and ii 	 	 	 	 	b . i and iii 
	c. ii and iii 	 	 	 	 	d. i, ii and iii 
Data South Korea Bangladesh 
Population (in million) 48 134 
Density of Population (per sq. km.) 493 1000 
Export (billion dollar) 159 6.6 
Export Per Capita (dollar) 3,300 50
108	 Secondary Geography 
Creative Questions 
1. Answer the questions from the given map below. 
a. Write the name of the continent as indicated under star mark. 
b. Describe the plains formed by the river deposition in Asia. 
c. Identify the similar climate zone of both Asia and Europe by drawing a map 	 
	 of Asia. 
d. Why it is neither summer nor winter extreme in the monsoon climate zone 
in Asia -- analyze. 
Equator 
Tropic of Cancer 
Tropic of Capricorn 
66
1∞ 
23 
1
2 
23 
1
2 
0 
2
∞
∞ 
∞
The Continent of Asia	 109 
Chapter Three 
Malaysia 
Introduction : Malaysia has been formed of the southern part of South-East Asian 
Peninsula and Sabah of Borneo Island and Sarawak. The Malay Peninsula is West 
Malaysia and Sabah and Sarawak is East Malaysia. 
Malaysia is one of the friendly countries of Bangladesh. The people of this country 
freed themselves from the foreign rule and supremacy and then they have accelerated 
the pace of economic development by their untiring toil. Bangladesh is rapidly 
expanding her economic co-operation with this country. 
Location : The South China Sea is in the north of Malaysia, Celebis Sea in the east. 
Java Sea in the south and the Isthmas of Malacca in the west. The country is located 
between 2∞ South latitude to 8∞ North latitude, and 100∞ East longitude to 120∞ East 
longitude. 
Area and inhabitants : Malaysia is a country having an area of 3,29,750 square 
kilometres. The total population of Malaysia is 2.89 crore and density of population is 
79 per square kilometres. The state language is Malay. People of different religious 
beliefs such as, Islam, Buddhism, Christianity, Confucianism, Taoism, Sikh, Bahai, 
Hinduism live in this country. However, the majority is Muslims. 
Fig. 59 : Political division of Malaysia
110	 Secondary Geography 
Physiography : Malaysia is formed of coastal plains while the central region has high 
plateau. There is a narrow plain in the east and west coast of Malaya Peninsula, while 
the plains in the south coast is relatively broader. The southern part of the western 
coast of Sarawak is quite broad and the northern part becomes narrower gradually. 
The northern part of Sabah is a wide plain. There are only a number of plain lands of 
considerably large size in mountainous or hilly Malaya Peninsula. The principal 
mountainous water-shed is located near the west coast. Some of its parts are more 
than 2,100 metres high. There are many mountain ranges parallel to the coastline. 
The land in the western part of the principal water-shed is undulatory and fertile and 
has been developed considerably. But the eastern part of the same water-shed is forest 
covered mountainous land and less developed. The principal mountain ranges of the 
Malaya Peninsula are extended from north to south and is mainly formed of granite 
rock. But some of the mountains in the east are formed of quartzite and shale. 
However, there are some regions formed of limestone with steep flank in the west of 
the peninsula. The small basins formed of new rocks are found here and there. One of 
such basins can be found near Kuala Lampur. 
Fig. 60 : Physiography of Malaysia 
The regions of Sabah and Sarawak of North Borneo may be divided into three parts 
such as (1) the coastal plains, (2) the piedmont regions, and (3) the hilly regions. 
Alluvial soil has formed the coastal plains and small hills have made up the piedmont 
regions. The coastal plain is formed of alluvium and the piedmont region is formed of 
parallel mountain ranges extending from north to south have gradually elevated to a 
height more than 1,805 metres. The Kinabalu mountain is 4,050 metres high.
Malaysia	 111 
Climate : Malaysia is located in the north of the equator. Naturally, the climate is 
equatorial and rain falls the whole year round and most of the rainfall occurs in the 
form of convection rain. Although located in the equatorial region, Monsoon blows 
over this country. 
The North-East and the South-West Monsoon bring rain in both the seasons of winter 
and summer. The eastern coast of Malaysia is under the direct influence of North-East 
Monsoon and hence wet season prevails from November to March and flows strongly 
over the neighbouring seas. Average rainfall in most of the areas of Malaysian Islands 
is 2,540 millimetres. The amount of rainfall increases in some open areas upto 6,860 
millimetres but in the covered valleys, the rainfall comes down to 1,524 millimetres. 
The average temperature varies from 25∞ to 27∞ Celsius. In the low lying areas, the 
average temperature is around 27∞ Celsius throughout the year. 
Fig. 61 : Windflow of Malaysia 
The west coast of Malaysia is under the influence of Indian Oceanic South-West 
Monsoon. The wet season lasts from May to September. The western part of Malaysia 
remains partly outside the direct influence of the wind as Sumatra Island stands as a 
barrier to the flow of South-West Monsoon. As a result, the strait of Malacca located 
between the Island of Sumatra and Malaya Peninsula remains relatively calm. For 
this, it has actually accelerated the economic growth of this region. The change of the 
direction of the windflow occurs during the months of April and October. 
Average temperature in the north coastal area of Sabah remains at 27∞ Celsius. Two 
seasons prevail there one during October to April when there occurs heavy rainfall under 
the influence of North-East Monsoon, the other one during May to September when 
relatively dry weather prevails. January and February are the time for heavy rainfall.
112	 Secondary Geography 
Natural vegetation : Natural vegetation of Malaysia is dense and evergreen. This 
forest extends from sea plain to the high mountains. There is huge aquatic mangrove 
forest in the west coast plain of Malaya Peninsula and a narrow ring ‘Cassiua Bina’ 
tree of tamarisk group in sandy shore of east coast. 
In the equatorial forest of this country, the tall, straight and branchless trees of 
different species have a dense growth. About 50 per cent of the trees have a height of 
more than 30 feet. The big trees grow up with a canopy of thick leaves which the rain 
can penetrate but no sunlight ever reaches the ground. As a result, the land under these 
trees gets less light like twilight. Under the canopy of thick leaves, there is the under 
growth of creeper-like plants as well as bamboo and cane. 
Since in the equatorial forest, 
trees of different species have 
dense growth, one cannot 
find many trees of a certain 
species at a particular place. 
So, it is very difficult to 
collect a great number of tree 
trunks of a particular species 
and many trees are destroyed 
while bringing the trunks out 
of the forests. It is an 
economic loss. The valuable 
hard wood trees like Iron 
wood, Rose wood, Ebony, 
Mahogany and Rubber are 
procured from the forest of 
Malaysia and besides Palm, 
Bamboo, Malayan cane, 
Malaccan cane are also 
collected. But the plants of 
commercial use are not 
available in abundance in 
such a natural environment of 
the forest. 
Agriculture : The agricultural 
system in Malaysia is divided 
into (1) Indigeneous system of 
agriculture and (2) Arable 
agriculture system. 
Rice grows in the west coast valleys and east coast of the peninsula. The farmers grow 
rice just to meet their own need. Malaysia imports three eigths (3/8) of its total need 
of rice from abroad. Besides, the farmers grow tobacco, camphor, sago, spices, coffee, 
cocoa, tea and tapioca. There is little farming in the areas far from the coast and 
valleys. Some of the areas of the forest are inhabited by backward ‘Semang’, an 
Fig. 62 : Landuse of Malaysia peninsula 
LANDUSE OF MALAYA 
PENINSULA
Malaysia	 113 
aboriginal tribe who are not used to farming. The Malaysians live mainly in the 
village. The extensive progress in the cities is carried out by the Chinese. 
Rubber plantation started in Malaysia in 1895 as an arable system of Agriculture. 
Rubber is produced commercially in the big farms. Rubber plantation is practised in 
30 lakh acres of land mainly in the low hilly regions and low plains of the west coast. 
Fig. 63 : Landuse in Sabah and Sarawak 
The trees having big trunks are cut down and other plants are burnt to prepare lands 
for rubber plantation. Steps have been taken carefully so that soils are not washed out. 
In fact, some other temporary plants 
are used as cover to check soil erosion. 
Rubber cannot be collected from the 
trees less than 7 years old. One is to 
wait several more years to get good 
quality of rubber. Rubber production in 
Malaysia has got much importance due 
to the location of the gardens just in 
the vicinity of the coast, improved 
transport system, no impact of tidal 
water, easy availability of labour force, 
fast transportation of rubber products 
to the ports, abundant demand of 
rubber outside the country etc. Fig. 64 : Rubber collection from tree
114	 Secondary Geography 
Of the other arable plants, coconut, palm tree, pineapples and tobacco are worth 
mentioning. The farming of coconut has steadily increased in the sandy areas of the 
coast. The farming of African palm trees producing edible oil has a strong economic 
possibility. Comparatively the pineapples are cultivated in the low quality land. 
Rubber and tobacco are produced as arable crop in Sabah and Sarawak. Besides, sago 
and black pepper are also produced in this part of the country. 
Mineral resources : Mineral tin is the principal mineral product of Malaysia. Vast 
quantities of tin ore to produce tin are available. Most of the tin ore available in 
Malaya are procured from alluvial stratum. The high quality ore is deposited in the 
valleys of west coast. The procured mineral tin ore sent to Penang for refinement. The 
ore is very important for producing tin sheets. 
Fig. 65 : Mineral resources of Malaysia 
Coal is procured from the ancient lake basins of Malaya Peninsula. This coal is used 
in the railway engine and other self propelled vehicles. The petroleum fields in the 
hilly slopes of Sabah have earned considerable importance. The important oil fields 
are located in the anticlines of the folds in the hilly slopes of Sarawak. Moreover, 
mineral iron and gold are mined in Malaysia. 
Industry : Tin refineries and petroleum production are the chief industries in 
Malaysia. This country has occupied first place in tin production in the world. 
Malaysia is famous for small and cottage industries. It is one of the countries in Asia 
that produces computer parts and electronic goods.
Malaysia	 115 
Transport and communication : Land communications are well developed in the 
country. Railway and roads have reached all the places. Metalled road is about 25,446 
kilometres and railway is about 1,488 kilometres. Railway lines and roads have 
connected the rubber plantations, tin, petroleum, coal, gold, mineral iron producing 
fields, refineries, towns, cities, ports and commercial centres. The railway lines of this 
country are connected with that of Thailand. The sea routes connect the two seperated 
parts of the country. 
Fig. 66 : Transport system of Malaysia 
Foreign Trade : The most important exportable items of Malaysia are rubber, tin and 
palm oil. She also exports tobacco, sago, different spices, coconut kernel and oil, 
coffee and products of cottage industries. Recently Malaysia has earned the fame for 
becoming one of the most industrially advanced countries of Asia by exporting 
equipments, computer parts, electronic goods and other industrial products. Rice is the 
main imported commodity. Cloth and ready-made garments, paper and medicine are 
also imported. Most of the rubber is exported to the United States of America. 
Cities, ports and commercial centres : Kuala Lampur is the capital of Malaysia. 
Georgetown is the main city of Penang and Penang is one of the main sea ports. 
Malacca founded in 1511 is now an old city and has less importance, Sutenham, near 
Kuala Lampur is an important port. Clang is the biggest sea port. Epoh is a tin 
producing centre and a main city. Jacelton is the principal city of the west coast of 
Sabah. Miri, city of Sarawak is the main centre of oil fields. Kuching and Sibu are the 
important river ports.
116	 Secondary Geography 
Population and Development Trends 
Population : High fertility, less mortality and migration are the factors of population 
growth. This country records 2.24% for the rate of population growth, 27.95% for 
birth rate, 5.56% for death rate, and 24.70% for child mortality. Family planning is 
practised to stabilize population growth. Various steps are taken for population control 
so that birth rate is reduced and family size is kept small. These are necessary to 
achieve planned human resource development. 59% are Malaya and other native 
people, 32% are Chinese and 9% are of Indian origin. 78% of the population are 
literate of which 86% are males and 70% are females. All above the age of 10 years 
can read and write. 
Development trend : The country has been gradually moving ahead since its 
independence on 31st August, 1957 from British rule. The development in agriculture 
is remarkable. The government is particularly active in maintaining the trend of 
growth in industries, especially small and cottage industries. People actively 
participate in development programmes. According to world population data sheet 
2010, the Annual Gross National Income (GNI) of this country was 13,740 US Dollar. 
Due to the limited availability of labour force, manpower is imported from friendly 
countries for employment in agriculture, industries and trade and business. Many 
people from Bnagladesh are in employment in Malaysia. 
Malaysia 
What we learnt from this chapter : 
Location and area : Malaysia is an important country of South-East Asia. The South 
China, is in its north, the Celebis Sea in the east, Java Sea in the south and the 
Malacca Strait in the west. The area of the country is 3,29,750 square kilometres and 
population records only 2.89 crore. The density of population is 79 persons per square 
kilometres. 
Physiography : The coastal area of Malaysia is plain land and the central region is 
formed of plateaus. The main water-shed is located near the west coast. The mountain 
ranges extend from north to south. There are coastal plains, hilly slopes and hilly 
regions in Sabah and Sarawak. The rivers are not long. 
Climate : Malaysia experiences rain throughout the year. The strong wind blows over 
the sea from November to March. Since the Sumatra Island remains as a barrier to the 
flow of South-West Monsoon, rainfall is scarce from May to September in the west of 
Malay Peninsula. The North-East Monsoon that blows from October to April, causes 
heavy rainfall in Sabah and Sarawak. Average temperature varies from 25∞ to 27∞ 
Celsius throughout the country.
Malaysia	 117 
Natural vegetation : Malaysia is a country of dense and evergreen forest. There is a 
huge aquatic mangrove forest in the plains of west coast and a narrow ring of ‘Cassiua 
Bina’, a tree of Tarmarisk group in the sandy shore of east coast of Malay Peninsula. 
Valuable hard wood trees like Iron wood, Rose wood, Ebony, Mahogany and Rubber 
as well as palm tree, bamboo and cane are grown in abundance in the equatorial forest 
of central region. 
Agriculture : The agriculture system can be divided into (1) Indigeneous system and 
(2) Arable agriculture system. Rice is produced in the valleys of west coast and the 
east coast of Peninsula. Besides, the farmes grow tobacco, camphor, sago, spices, 
coffee, cocoa, tea and tapioca. The farming of rubber has been practised here as an 
arable system of agriculture. Coconut, palm, pineapple and tobacco are also grown. 
Rubber and tobacco are produced as arable crop in Sabah and Sarawak. Sago and 
black pepper are grown in this part. 
Mineral resources : Mineral tin is the principal mineral product. Petroleum is also 
extracted in the hilly slopes of Sabah. The oil fields are located in the ring of the hilly 
slope of Sarawak. Gold and mineral iron ore are also mined in Malaysia. 
Industry : Tin refineries and petroleum productions are the two principal industries. 
Malaysia is also famous for small and cottage industries. It is one of the countries of 
Asia that produces computer parts and electronic goods. 
Foreign Trade : Rubber, tin and palm oil are the important exportable items. Besides, 
tobacco, sago, spices, coconut kernel and oil, coffee, machineries, computer parts and 
electronic goods are also exported. Moreover, different types of cottage industry 
products are other exported goods. Of the imported commodities rice, cloth, readymade 
garments, paper and medicine are the important ones. 
Population and development trends : The factors of population growth are high 
fertility, less mortality and migration. Population growth in Malaysia is stabilized 
through the adaptation of family planning methods. Moreover, in order to achieve 
planned human resource development, family size is kept small and the birth rate is 
also kept low by practising various methods of birth control. The country has been 
gradually moving ahead since its independence on 31st August, 1957 from British 
rule. The record of development in Malaysia is particularly remarkable in agriculture. 
But the government is also keen to keep up the development trend in small and 
cottage industries.
118	 Secondary Geography 
Exercise 
Multiple Choice Questions 
Read the passage below and answer question number 1 to 4. 
Malaysia is located in the north of the equator. There is rainfall in this country in both 
the seasons in winter and summer. The wind blows strongly in the country over the 
neighbouring seas. The average temperature various from 25∞ to 27∞ Celsius. By the 
influence of weather and climate the increase of the birth rate in Malaysia is higher 
than that of Bangladesh. The govt. of the country has taken various steps to make the 
population human resources development. 
1. 	Which climate influence on Malaysia although it is located in equatorial 		 
	r egion? 
	a. Monsoon 		 	 	b . Tropical coastal marine 
	c. Tropical continental 	d. Mild-w arm temperate 
2. 	Which factor influences on the rains of Malaysia in both the seasons of 		 
	winter and summer? 
	a. Neighbouring seas 	 	b . Strong wind movement 
	c. Location of equatorial line 	d. The Monsoon blows 
3. 	The step of effective development of Malaysia is-- 
	i. 	The adaptation of family planning 
	ii. 	Family size is kept small 
	iii. 	Birth control 
	 Which one is correct below? 
	a. i 	 	 	 	 	b . ii 
	c. iii 	d. i, ii and iii 
4. 	What is the rate of population growth in Malaysia? 
	a. 2.04% 	 	 	 	b . 2.14% 
	c. 2.24% 		d. 2.34% 
Creative Questions 
1. Malaysia achieves its independence in the year 1957. It has now become a principal 
economic factor in the South-East Asian countries through political stability and 
unexpected industrial development. In the decade of 80’s of the last century 
Malaysia was in the same condition in terms of economic power as Bangladesh 
today. But the scenario of 2005 was of different which is shown below in the table.
Malaysia	 119 
	 Source : BBC World News Website 
a. What is the name of the country situated in East Malaysia? 
b. 	 Why is Malaysia under the influence of the monsoon although it is in the 			 
equatorial region? 
c. 	 Explain in 3 different economic sector of the labour employment in Malaysia 
in the year 2005 and show it in the Pie Chart. 
d. 	 Compare Malaysia with Bangladesh according to the information from the 
table and explain the gulf of difference in terms of per capita income. 
Features Malaysia Bangladesh 
I. The rate of population growth 1.75% 2.05% 
2. Income per capita (US dollar) 12,800 2,300 
3. Labour power employment 
(a) Agriculture 13% 63% 
(b) Industry 36% 11% 
(c) Service (Sheba) 51% 26% 
120	 Secondary Gerography 