Prescribed by the National Curriculum and Textbook Board as a 
Textbook for Classes IX-X from the Academic year 1997. 
SECONDARY GEOGRAPHY 
For Classes IX-X 
Written by 
Dr. Shamsul Alam 
Kazi Abdur Rouf 
Selina Shahjahan 
Translated by 
Abjad Hossain Chowdhury 
Syed Shakhawat Hossain 
Shamim Ahmed 
Edited by 
Nazrul Islam 
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Dhaka 
 Published by National Curriculum and Textbook Board 
69-70, Motijheel Commercial Area, Dhaka-1000 
(All rights reserved by the Publisher) 
First Edition : 1997 
Reprint : September, 2011 
Computer Compose 
Perform Color Graphics (pvt.) Ltd. 
Cover 
Biren Shome 
Maps and Graps 
Graphosman 
Design 
NCTB, Dhaka 
For free distribution from academic year 2010 by the Government of Bangladesh 
Printed by : 
Preface 
Education is the key to development. A progressively improved education system largely 
determines the pace and the quality of national development. To reflect the hopes and 
aspirations of the people and the socio-economic and cultural reality in the context of the 
post independent Bangladesh, new textbooks were introduced in the beginning of the 1980s 
following the recommendations of the National Curriculum and Textbook Committee. 
In 1994, in accordance with the need for change and development, the textbooks of lower 
secondary, secondary and higher secondary were revised and modified. The textbooks from 
classes VI to IX were written in 1995. In 2000, almost all the textbooks were rationally 
evaluated and necessary revision were made. In 2008, the Ministry of Education formed a 
Task Force for Education. According to the advice and guidance of the Task Force, the cover, 
spelling and information in the textbooks were updated and corrected. 
To make assessment more meaningful and in accordance with the need of the curriculum, 
Creative Questions and Multiple Choice Questions are given at the end of each chapter. It is 
hoped that this will reduce the dependency of students on rote memorisation. The students 
will be able to apply the knowledge they have gained to judge, analyses and evaluate real life 
situation. 
The textbook of Secondary Geography has been revised. Unnecessary repetition has been 
avoided. New chapters have been included. Maps have been given so that learners can read 
and learn to use them. In order to make learning of Geography simple and casy, figures and 
pictures are also given. 
This book of Geography for class IX and X is the English Version of the original textbook 
entitled ‘Maydhamic Bhagyal’ written in Bangla. 
We know that curriculum development is a continuous process on which textbooks are 
written. Any logical and formative suggestions for improvement will be considered with care. 
On the event of the golden jubilee of the Independence of Bangladesh in 2021, we want to be 
a part of the ceaseless effort to build a prosperous Bangladesh. 
In spite of sincere efforts in translation, editing 'and printing some inadvertent errors and 
omissions may be found in the book. However, our efforts to make it more refined and 
impeccable will continue. Any constructive suggestion towards its further improvement will 
be gratefully considered. 
I thank those who have assisted us with their intellect and effort in the writing, editing and 
rational evaluation of this book. We hope that the book will be useful for the students for 
whom it is written. 
Prof. Md. Mostafa Kamaluddin 
Chairman 
National Curriculum and Textbook Board 
Dhaka
Contents 
Chapter Subject matter Page 
Part One Mathematical Geography 2 
Chapter one Luminaries and Solar System 2 
Chapter two Latitude and Longitude 9 
Chapter three The Motion of the Earth 21 
Part Two 
Physical Geography 
Introduction 
32 
32 
Chapter one Lithosphere 33 
Rocks and Minerals 
Changes of the Earth ís Crust 
37 
43 
Diastrophism 43 
Landforms 52 
Chapter two Atmosphere 59 
Chapter three The Hydrosphere 77 
Part Three Regional Geography 87 
Chapter one The Continent of Europe 89 
Chapter two The Continent of Asia 98 
Chapter three Malaysia 109 
Chapter four South Korea 120 
Chapter five The Middle East 129 
Chapter six Bangladesh 143 
Part Four 
Chapter one 
Practical Geography 
Drawing of Scales 
196 
196 
Chapter two Drawing of Plans 204 
Chapter three International Conventional Signs 207 
Chapter four Map Reading 209 
Chapter five 
Chapter six 
Drawing of Bangladesh Map 
Representation of Data 
213 
220 

Secondary Geography	 1 
Introduction 
Geography and the Study of Geography 
Man and the earth are the principal constituents of geography. Geography is the 
description of the earth as the dwelling place of human beings. The ancient Greek 
geographer Eratosthenes first used the term ‘Geography’. In Greek, ‘Geoí means ‘the 
earth’ and ‘graphy’ means ‘description’. So geography is the description of the earth. 
Richard Hartshone said in 1959 Perspective on the Nature of Geography that 
geography is related to giving a rational and well-arranged account of the changing 
characteristics of the earthís surface. Professor Mackney said in 1962 that geography 
studies human activities and livelihood in human related physical and social 
environment. Professor Dudley Stamp defined geography to be a study of the earth 
and its inhabitants. Many others have defined geography in different perspectives. You 
will come to learn these in higher classes. 
The Rationale of Studying Geography 
One of the reasons of studying geography as a separate subject in secondary classes is 
that man cannot live in this world without nature and geography is the mother of all 
natural sciences. The study of geography gives us the knowledge of the location of 
hills, mountains, rivers, deserts, plains and plateaus in different places of the earth, the 
cause of their formation and the distinctive features of their formation. 
The scope of geography is so wide, that it is not limited to the study of physical 
elements only. It also examines the process of development of manís economic life by 
using natural resources. The study of geography is essential to know about different 
agricultural methods and different kinds of crops, the status of industry, commerce 
and communication facilities. The knowledge of geography is also essential to prepare 
economic plans. Geography is divided into different branches. 
The different branches of geography are : 
1. 	Physical geography 
2. 	Economic geography 
3. 	Political geography 
4. 	Mathematical geography 
5. 	Human geography 
6. 	Regional geography 
7. 	Historical geography 
8. 	Plant geography 
9. 	Zoo geography 
The three branches of geography studied at the secondary level are (1) Mathematical 
geography, (2) Physical geography and (3) Regional geography. These three branches 
have been described in the following chapters.