
Chapter - 3 
Iba'dat (Loyalty) 
Allah Ta'ala has created us. Allah has afforded us innumerable gifts. We are 
Allah's slaves. As the slaves of Allah whatever we do with the hope to please Him, 
following the instructions of the Prophet (Sm), is called Iba'dat. In the Qur'anul Karim 
Allah says: 
Meaning: "I have created Jinn and mankind for My Iba'dat only." (Sura Az- 
Zariaat) Iba'dat means to show loyalty, to abide by the orders and prohibitions given 
by Allah. 
The main target of iba'dat is to achieve the pleasure of Allah. So for attaining the 
pleasure of Allah whatever good deed we perform is iba'dat. That is to say, all the 
activities performed according to the directions given by Almighty Allah and Allah's 
Prophet (Sm) are regarded as iba'dat. 
Allah and Allah's Prophet (Sm) have taught us how to perform iba'dat. About this 
Almighty Allah says: 
Meaning: "Be submissive to Allah and His Prophet (Sm) and if you turn away from 
it, then listen, Allah does not like the Kafirs or unbelievers" (Sura Imran:32) 
The main theme of this Ayat is that the path directed by Allah and Allah's Prophet 
(Sm) is the basis of iba'dat. So we will be able to achieve the satisfaction of Allah and 
Allah's Prophet (Sm) by properly performing the deeds directed by Allah and Allah's 
Prophet (Sm). 
Importance and Significane of Iba'dat 
Human beings are created for performing iba'dat. And other living things and 
beings are created for the welfare of mankind. Man has to abide by the orders of Allah 
and perform the responsibility of Allah's Khilafat.
Forma-9, Islamic Studies-9 
Iba'dat does not mean simple prayer only. All the activities done according to the 
directions of Allah are iba'dat. About it Allah says : 
Meaning: "After performing Salat you spread yourselves on the earth, try to 
acquire the favour of Allah. And remember Allah so much so that you can be 
successful." (Sura Jumua: 10) 
The real theme of this Ayat (verse) is that discharging the responsiblities of this 
world after performing properly the activities ordered by Allah is equivalent to iba'dat. 
Allah will reward us if we abide by the rules of Allah and Allah's Prophet (Sm) 
and perform our worldly duties properly. Then we will get peace in this world and in 
the world hereafter. 
Haqqullah and Haqqul Iba'd 
Haqqullah 
Almighty Allah has sent human beings as Allah's representatives to this world for 
the performance of only His iba'dat. We perform His iba'dat to get His satisfaction. 
Allah has directed how we ought to perform iba'dat and what work we have to do. In 
our daily life the iba'dats we do for the satisfaction of Allah are of two phases. The 
first phase is fixed only for Almighty Allah, such as salat, saum etc. We must admit 
that without the Creator the existence of this world would not be possible. Allah 
exists. Allah is one and unique. Allah has no share-holder. Allah creates everything, 
destroys everything. We are Allah's servants. Our life and death, food, sleep are all in 
the hand of Allah. Allah wants Allah's servants to admit and comply with all these 
things. Almighty Allah declared in the Holy Qur'an: 
"I have created Jinn and Mankind for the purpose that they will do only My 
Iba'dat." 
To comply with the rights of Allah, we have to do the following things: 
1) To admit the sovereignty and authority of Allah in our whole life. 
2) To abide by the orders of Allah. 
3) To submit oneself wholly to the will of Allah and expect His favour in all 
circumstances. 
Islamic Studies 65
We have to perform the above things in our personal, family, social, political, 
economic and in all other spheres of life. We have to do all our works according to the 
dictates of Allah. Only then the rights of Allah will be established and we will be 
rewarded by Allah. 
Haqqul Iba'd 
We live in society together with our parents, relatives and neighbours. We help 
each other in our weal and woe, in sorrows and distress. This mutual help and 
sympathy is called 'Haqqaul Iba'd' or the rights of the servants of Allah. About the 
rights of the servants of Allah, Prophet (Sm) says: "Surely your provider has rights 
over you, your wife has rights over your body, your children have rights over you. 
So give the rights of those who have rights over you." 
From the beginning to the end of Sura Nisa of the Qur'anul Karim the rights of 
one human being over another human being have been described. Almighty Allah has 
ordered people to observe their rights and duties towards other people. Sometimes 
these rights and do their duties are made Farz (compulsory). He who will abandon or 
deny them, will face harsh punishment in the day of the final judgement. 
Haq or rights of people over people has got eight categories. Among them there 
are some rights which must be observed in any circumstances. These are Farz. There 
are other rights which should be observed according to the situations and some others 
are ordinary rights. These are introduced below in brief: 
1) The rights of relatives (These are Farz); 
2) The rights of distant relatives; 
3) The rights of neighbours; 
4) The rights of the citizens of the country; 
5) The rights of the rulers and the ruled; 
6) The rights of the Muslims in general; 
7) The rights of the needy people; 
8) The rights of the non-Muslims. 
66 Islamic Studies
Salat 
Introduction 
The best way of the expression of submission to Allah Ta'ala is Salat. The servants 
of Allah can express their heartiest loyaty to Him through Salat. 
Salat is a kind of prayer. In Salat the servants of Allah express their dua or prayer 
to Allah, and that is why, it is called Salat. Islam is based on five Rukons or pillars. 
These five pillars are: Kalima, Salat, Zakat, Saum and Hajj. Salat is the second pillar 
of Islam. It is next to Kalima. The performance of salat five times a day inspires 
people to stand firm about the rules and regulations of life based on the directions of 
Allah. This salat makes them aware of their mistakes and errors. It inspires them every 
moment to abide by the rules and laws of Allah. In the Holy Qur'an, orders have been 
given again and again to establish Salat. It is said: 
Meaning: "Establish Salat" (Sura Bani Israil: 78) 
It is said that salat should be established in congregation, not alone. 
Almighty Allah says: 
Meaning: "Perform your Ruku with the assembled people." (Sura Al-Baqarah:43) 
That is, establish salat together with other people. The Prophet (Sm) says: "If the 
salat is performed in congregation, you will get the sawab twenty seven times 
more." Salat leads people onto the honest path. Allah says: 
Meaning: "Surely Salat keeps people away from vulgarity and evil doings." (Sura 
Al-Ankaboot) 
Huzur Akram (Sm) says: "If someone performs Salat whole heartedly, that salat 
would become light for him/her in the day of judgement." One day the Prophet (Sm) 
said to the followers: "If a river flows by the side of someone's house, and if he/she 
takes bath everyday in that river, will there be any dirt in his/her body?" The 
Sahabis said in reply: "It will not be, oh Prophet (Sm) of Allah." Then the Prophet 
(Sm) said: "Like this, if anybody performs salat five times a day, all his/her sins and 
Islamic Studies 67
crimes will be driven away." The performer of salat becomes sinless. Salat 
differentiates between Iman and Kufr. 
Without approved reasons of Shariat Salat cannot be abandoned in any 
circumstances. 
Religious Importance 
Salat strengthens Iman. Through salat nearness to Allah can be achieved quickly. 
It keeps human mind and body away from all types of sins and immoral activities. 
When a person performs salat he/she prays to Allah for keeping him/her away from all 
kinds of sins. Allah forgives the person who performs salat. 
Social importance 
Performance of salat not only uplifts the soul, it has great importance socially. If 
the Muslims perform salat in congregation they get a chance to meet together five 
times a day. As a result, they can enquire about one another. Mutual love and affection 
develop among them. In congregation, people have to stand side by side. In this way, 
they get from salat the lesson of doing work together. 
Ruku and Sijdah have to be performed in salat as per procedures. It gives the lesson 
of being disciplined. We will perform salat regularly and make life happy and beautiful. 
Zakat 
Allah Ta'ala has given us wealth for our livelihood. All men do not possess equal 
wealth. Some have less and some have more. Allah Ta'ala has determined the share of 
the poor in the wealth of the rich. The system of Zakat has been set up with a view to 
helping the poor. 
Zakat literally means purity, clarity and rectification. In the terminology of 
Shariat, a fixed part of the wealth of a Muslim is to be given at the end of every year 
to the sectors determined by Allah. If Zakat is paid, wealth becomes purified. Zakat is 
one of the five pillars of Islam. Payment of Zakat is Farz. In respect of importance 
Zakat is next to Salat. About Zakat it is said in the Holy Qur'an: 
Meaning: "Establish Salat and pay Zakat" (Sura An Noor-5) The Prophet (Sm) says 
about this: "Those for whom Zakat is Farz, will be severely punished by Allah in the 
68 Islamic Studies
life hereafter if they do not pay it." 
In fact, no Muslim can remain a real Muslim unless he/she pays Zakat. Almighty 
says: "Destruction of the Mushriks is inevitable, because they do not pay Zakat. So, 
not to pay Zakat is the act of the Mushriks." 
Zakat is one of the pillars of economy establisthed by Allah. To deny Zakat is like 
denying Allah and Allah's Prophet (Sm). According to Islamic law, the person who is 
able to pay Zakat, must pay it. 
Hazrat Abu Bakr Siddiq (R), the first Caliph of Islam, fought against the persons 
who denied Zakat in the same way as he fought against Kafirs. He considered the man 
who denies to pay Zakat as Murtad (one deviated from Islam). 
The main aim of paying Zakat is to change the condition of the poor so that they 
can gain financial solvency and have no want. 
A lot of poor people can be provided with the work by collecting Zakat in our 
country. If we can provide work to the unemployed poor people by developing small 
cottage indurstries, one day there will be no needy people in the country. As a result, 
peace and order will come back in the country, If Zakat is paid regularly, there will be 
no distinction between the rich and the poor. So the rich must pay their Zakat duly. 
Saum 
Introduction 
Saum means to refrain from doing something. In the Islamic terminolgy refraining 
from taking food and satisfying sexual appetites from dawn to dusk for the 
satisfaction of Allah is called Saum. 
Saum is Farz for every adult Muslim man or woman. About this it has been declared 
in the Holy Qur'an: 
Meaning: "Saum is made Farz for you, as it was Farz for the previous Ummat, so 
that you can acquire Taqwa." (Sura Al-Baqara: 183) 
There fundamental objectives of Saum have been described in the Holy Qur'an: 
1) Acquiring Taqwa 
2) Declaring the supremacy of Allah 
3) Expressing gratitude to Allah. 
In a Hadith-e-Qudsi, it is narrated that Allah says: 
Islamic Studies 69
Meaning: "Saum is only for Me, I Myself will pay for it." 
The importance of Saum and its benefits are innumerable. The Sawab of Saum is 
very great. 
The person who fasts is rewarded with innumerable virtues. The great Prophet 
(Sm) says: "The virtue of all good deeds will be from ten times to seven hundred 
times but as Saum is only for Allah, He Himself will reward for it." 
A man observing fasting is able to control all his bad instincts. The Prophet (Sm) 
says: "Saum is like a shield for the believers." 
Saum is a fundamental Farz (compulsory) duty. If any one denies it, he/she becomes a 
Kafir (infidel). 
The month of Ramadan is a month of patience. Through the observance of Saum 
for one month, the patience a servant of Allah is tested. Being pleased, Allah will 
place Allah's fasting servant in heaven. The Prophet (Sm) says: "Ramadan is a month 
of taking patience and the return of patience is heaven." 
Social significance 
1) Sympathy: Greneral people are apt to enjoy life. They want to utilize their wealth 
for their own benefits only. The rich people can never feel the pangs of hunger and 
thirst, want and scarcity. As Saum is Farz for both the rich and the poor, the rich 
can realize the suffering of hunger. As a result, they become sympathetic with the 
poor. 
2) Removal of bad habits: There are some detestable habits in human beings like 
jealousy, malice and tendency to speak ill of others. But a person who observes 
Saum, tries to give up these bad habits. As a result peace and order prevail in the 
society. 
3) Strengthening social relationship: While observing Saum, people call each other for 
taking Sahri and Iftar (the meal taken in the last falf of the night and the food taken 
breaking fast) for getting Sawab (reward). They send Iftar to one another's house. 
Thus the social relationship is strengthened. 
Besides all these, there is unlimited economic importance in observing Saum. 
While observing Saum the fasting people give away ample alms for getting extra 
reward from Allah. Thus the financial scarcity of the poor is reduced. So for 
getting nearness to Allah and considering its social importance everyone should 
observe Saum. We will observe Saum sincerely. 
70 Islamic Studies
Hajj 
Introduciton: 
Hajj means to determine or desire. In the Islamic terminology, Hajj means to 
perform certain functions directed by Allah and His Rasul (Sm) in the holy Ka'ba and at 
some other particular places on some particular days. Hajj is the fifth Rukon of Islam. 
Hajj is Farz for those rich Muslims who have got both financial and physical capacity to 
go to holy Makka and perform Hajj. Hajj is not Farz for the poor. Hajj is Farz only once 
in life-time. In the Holy Qur'an, a complete Sura on Hajj is revealed. Not only this, in 
some other parts of the Qur'an there are Ayats about Hajj. Almighty Allah says: 
Picture: Places related to performing Hajj 
Islamic Studies 71
Meaning: "It is a compulsory duty of a person to perform Hajj in the Baitullah Sharif 
for Allah, and it is for those who have ability to go there" (Sura Ale-Imran - 97) 
Spiritual teachings: 
In a Hadith, it is described that the Prophet (Sm) says: "The person who performs 
Hajj for the satisfaction of Allah and does not take part in any unjust action or act 
of sin, will return home so innocent as if he/she has just come out of his/her 
mother's womb." Hajj is Farz for the rich Muslims. If anyone denies it, he/she will 
become a Kafir (infidel). A performer of Hajj is very dear to Allah. Allah forgives all 
his/her crimes. The Prophet (Sm) says: "As water washes away all dirts, so Hajj 
washes away all impurity from the human mind." 
Social teachings: 
Through Hajj universal Muslim fraternity is expressed. Muslims of all parts of the 
world gather together in this place of unity. Hajj is the Muslims' world gathering. 
Millions of Muslims from different parts of the world having different languages, 
features, complexions take part in celebrating Hajj, wearing the same dress and 
observing the same procedure. 
Through Hajj the human mind is relieved of miserliness and lavishness. And for 
being economical, poverty is removed and economic balance is maintained. Our 
society honours the performers of Hajj (Hajjis) very much. 
Ordinary people regard the Hajjis for their Tawaf of the House of Allah. To 
comply with the orders of Allah and to get blessings of Allah, all the rich Muslims 
should perform Hajj as early as possible. 
Jiha'd 
Intorduction: 
Jiha'd means hard labour, effort and perseverance. In the Islamic terminology, to 
make the Deen (Islam) of Allah victorious, trying hard using physical, mental, 
economic and intellectual strengths against all unfavourable forces is called Jiha'd. To 
fight against all types of antiforces for establishing Islam perfectly is a great iba'dat. 
This type of Jiha'd is done only to uplift the religion (Deen) of Allah to the highest 
place. Jiha'd can never be done for any worldly purpose. Allah Ta'ala says: 
72 Islamic Studies
Forma-10, Islamic Studies-9 
Meaning: "The people having Iman (believers) fight on the path of Allah and the 
Kafirs fight on the path of (Satan)" (Sura An-Nisa-76) 
The Prophet (Sm) says: "The man who fights to establish the Deen (religion) of 
Allah is on the path of Allah." 
Spiritual teachings: 
Those who fight on the path of Allah are called Mujahids. Those who win Jiha'd 
are called 'Gazi'. Those who sacrifice their lives are called 'Shahid'. To Allah the 
dignity of the Shahids is very high. They are immortal. About the Shahids Almighty 
Allah says, 
"Those who die on the path of Allah, do not call them dead, rather they are alive." 
(Sura Al Baqara: 154) 
Types of Jiha'd. 
1) Zahiri or Open Jiha'd 
2) Baitini or Secret Jiha'd 
Open Jiha'd: 
The permanent enemies of Islam are the Kafirs, the Mushriks, the Munafiqs, 
the Jews etc. They always try to wipe away Islam from this world. To fight openly 
against these forces who are against Allah, is called open Jiha'd. Allah Ta'ala says: "O 
Prophet! Fight against the Kafirs and the Munafiqs and be harsh against them" 
(Sura Tauba : 73) 
Secret Jiha'd 
Iblis (Satan) and Nafs (evil-tendency) are deadly enemies to human beings. 
Falling into the trap of Satan and due to the pressure of evil-tendencies a person 
engages himself/herself in sinful acts. To fight against these deadly enemies, Iblis and 
evil-tendencies (Nafs), is called Secret Jiha'd. It is difficult to suppress evil tendencies. 
So to fight against evil tendencies is called a great Jiha'd. If evil-tendencies and Satan 
can be suppressed, the path to heaven will be smoother. The Prophet (Sm) says: 
"Fighting against Nafs or evil-tendencies is called the greatest Jiha'd." It is the holy 
Islamic Studies 73
duty of every Muslim to do Jiha'd to establish the Deen of Allah as well as to maintain 
peace and order in this world. It is an essential duty of everyone to sacrifice their life 
and property to fight against the enemies of Islam. We will follow the path of Islam. 
We will try to resist the irreligious people. 
Rights of parents 
Allah Ta'ala has created us. He controls everything about human beings. Because 
of parents, human beings come to this beautiful world. Parents are our nearest and 
dearest ones. With infinite love, sympathy and affection they rear their children. There 
is no limit of their sacrifice. When a child is born, it remains very helpless. At that 
time parents rear the child with great fondness and care fulfilling all its needs. So 
children's responsibilities and duties towards their parents are next to iba'dat to Allah. 
Everybody should take care so that the parents can lead their lives in peace and 
happiness. We should not do any thing or utter any word that might hurt them. 
Especially when they become old, weak and cannot earn and consequently become 
dependent upon their children, they should be taken care of more. For this, the duties 
and responsibilities of the children towards their parents are described with great 
importance in the Holy Qur'an. About this it is said in the Holy Qur'an: "Your 
Provider has ordered that you should not offer your Iba'dat to anyone except Him 
and that you should behave well with your parents. If one of them or both become 
old, do not utter a single word of annoyance in their presence. Do not give them any 
hint that you are in trouble because of them and do not talk to them in a 
threatening tone. Rather talk to them respectfully. Stretch your helpful hands 
towards them with sympathy. Devote yourself to their service." In the Holy Qur'an it 
is said: "Oh Allah! In my childhood my parents reared me with much love and care. 
Show that love and care to them." (Sura Bani Israil: 23-25) 
To perform the Iba'dat of Allah, not to do any shirk and behave well with the 
parents are equally important for man and woman. About it Almighty Allah says: 
Meaning: "You perform the iba'dat of Allah, do not make anything His share 
holder (Sharik) and behave well with your parents." (Sura An-Nisa: 36) 
Satisfaction of the parents is the satisfaction of Allah. In the Hadith Sharif it is said: "Allah 
is satisfied if parents are satisfied and Allah is dissatisfied if parents are dissatisfied." 
74 Islamic Studies
It is the compulsory duty of every son and daughter to abide by the decisions of 
their parents. But if the parents order them to do anything against Islam or give 
pressure for doing that, in that case children have to refuse to carry out the order of 
the parents and follow the order of Allah. Even in that case children should not 
abandon their parents. 
Disobedience to parents is an unforgivable crime. Allah will not forgive this sin. 
Rather, before giving such a sinner inevitable punishment in the world hereafter, 
he/she will be punished in this world also. About this the Prophet (Sm) says: 
"Almighty Allah forgives all the sins of His servants according to His will. But He 
does not forgive disobedience to parents. Rather He punishes such sinners in this 
worldly life before death." 
Both father and mother have their rights on their children. But the right of a 
mother is greater than of a father. Once a man came to the court (darber) of the 
Prophet (Sm) and said: "Your honour, both my father and mother are alive. I want 
to serve them. Whose right I will look after first?" The Prophet (Sm) replied, "Your 
mother's." The man again asked, "Then?" The Prophet (Sm) replied, "Your 
mother's." Third time the man asked the same question. The Prophet (Sm) said in 
reply: "Your mother's." When the same question is asked for the fourth time the 
Prophet replied: "Your father's." So it is evident that the right of a mother is greater 
than that of a father. 
About the right of a mother the Prophet (Sm) said: 
Meaning: "Heaven for a child lies under the feet of its mother." 
To get peace in the worldly life and to get unlimited happiness in heaven in the 
world hereafter, one must be submissive to one's parents. The total welfare of our 
worldly life lies in the satisfaction of the parents. So under no circumstances parents 
should be inflicted with pain and it is your duty to always treat them well. 
We will abide by the decisions of our parents. We will take care of them. Then 
Allah will be pleased. We will get blessings of Allah, and our life will be prosperous. 
Rights of the relatives 
Worldy attractions confine human life to this world. Here there are so many 
relatives like fathers, mothers, brothers, sisters, grandfathers, grandmothers, uncles 
and aunts and there are many more from the marital side. After performing the duty 
towards parents, these relatives have got the right to get co-operation and well 
treatment from us. 
Islamic Studies 75
In Islamic livelihood there are instructions to observe the rights of these relatives 
properly. About this it is said in the Holy Qur'an: 
Meaning: "You perform your duty towards your relatives." (Sura Bani Israil: 26) 
Allah has ordered us to behave well with them. 
It has been emphasized in the Holy Qur'an that one should remain conscious about 
the rights and duties of one's relatives. 
About it Allah says: 
Meaning: "They are the true religious people who, inspite of their fascination for 
wealth, give gifts to the relatives." (Sura Al-Baqara: 177) 
About giving gifts to close relatives the Prophet (Sm) says: 
"Two purposes are served if close relatives are given gifts. One is to maintain 
relationship with them and the other is to fulfil the objective of giving gifts." 
So, giving gifts to the people of distant relations without paying any heed to the 
near relatives is disliked by Allah. Thus the first and foremost duty of a person is to 
give gifts to the near relatives. 
The Prophet (Sm) says about those who break relationship with relatives: 
Meaning: "One, who severs relationship with the relatives, will not enter into 
heaven." 
Allah and the Prophet (Sm) have ordered human beings to maintain relationship 
with the relatives. Those who do not maintain it, will have to face great disasters. 
They will be deprived of the blessings of Allah here, and they will have to face severe 
punishment in hell in the life hereafter. 
So, to get blessings of Allah by escaping Allah's curse, we should do our duties 
towards our kith and kin. But under no circumstance any type of injustice or partiality 
should be done. So without exceeding the limits dictated by Islam we should try to 
observe the rights and duties of our relatives. 
Rights of neighbours 
Those who live around us are our neighbours. They first come forward in our 
happiness and sorrows, dangers and difficulties. If there is any trouble or disease, they 
quickly nurse and take care one another. They help one another if a marraige 
ceremony or any other function takes place. 
76 Islamic Studies
Who are the neighbours? When asked, the Prophet (Sm) says: 
"Those who live within forty houses in your front and back or your right and left 
are your neighbours." 
From the point of view of rights, the neighbours are divided into three categories: 
1. The Muslim relative neighbours have three rights: 
(a) as a Muslim. 
(b) as a relative and 
(c) as a neighbour. 
2. The Muslim neighbour who has two rights: as a Muslim and as a neighbour. 
3. The Muslim neighbour has only one right: that is, if a neighbour belongs to 
another religion even then he/she deserves well treatment from you. 
It is a moral duty of every Muslim to live in harmony with the neighbours and 
behave well with them. We should behave well with the neighbours for the sake of 
maintaining social peace and order in the society. Almighty Allah has ordered all to 
behave well with the neighbours, whatever category they may belong to. 
About those who do not fulfil the rights of the neighbours, Prophet (Sm) says: 
"The person whose neighbours are not safe from his/her oppression and illtreatment, 
will not be able to enter heaven." 
It is a heinous crime to inflict pain on neighbours. If a neighbour does not forgive 
one for this offence, he/she will lose the right to enter heaven. So it is a Kabira Gunah 
(serious crime). If a neighbour asks for help for honest purpose, he/she should be 
helped. If he/she is in want, his/her neighbours should try to remove it as much as 
possible. Rasulullah (Sm) says: "That man does not have Iman in its true sense who 
eats to his heart's content and his neighbour is hungry." 
A neighbour deserves well behaviour whether he/she is a Muslim or a non- 
Muslim. The Muslim saints were very conscious about the rights of their non-Muslim 
neighbours. A neighbour of Abu Hanifa (R) was an worshipper of fire. The man was a 
drunkard. Drinking wine throughout the night, he would beat drums and disturb the 
Imam in carrying on his iba'dat and study. 
One day the law and order enforcement authority arrested that neighbour of Iman 
Sahib and took him away. On that night hearing no sound in his house, the Imam 
Sahib enquired about it and heard that the man had been arrested. At this news he was 
hurt and went to release him. The Qazi (justice) told the Imam: "Sir, he has been 
arrested because he disturbs you." Imam Sahib said: "He is my neighbour. I have 
come to take him to fulfil the right of my neighbour". At last the Imam stood bail for 
him and he was released. He became a good man being moved by the behaviour of the 
Imam Sahib. 
Islamic Studies 77
Even if a neighbour is a non-Muslim, his/her rights should be properly observed. 
We will behave well with our neighbours. We will be sharers in their sorrows and 
sufferings. Then our life will be beautiful and peaceful. 
Rights of the helpless poor 
In a society the rich have their duties towards the poor. Those who have become 
unsuccesful in their struggle of life, those who are suffering from extreme poverty, 
those who are in distress, have their rights on the wealth of the rich Muslims. In the 
Qur'an and Hadith there is teaching to do good to the poor and the distressed. About 
this it is said in the Holy Qur'an: 
Meaning: "The needy and the deprived people have rights on their (the rich) 
wealth." (Sura Zariat: 19) 
It is Islam that for the first time has given great emphasis on helping the orphans 
and the penniless, helpless and the distressed. Giving away gifts to the poor does not 
decreases, rather increases one's wealth. 
In the Hadith it is described that if a person gives away gifts to the poor which is 
earned by Halal means, and if the gift is even of the quantity of a date, Almighty Allah 
will give him/her in return a lot of neki (benefit) amounting to a mountain. The 
Prophet (Sm) says: "O the Muslims, the best house is that in which there is an 
orphan and he is treated well, and worst house is that in which there is an orphan 
but he is badly treated." 
Our beloved Prophet (Sm) says: "Almighty Allah will give fruit from heaven to a 
person who gives food to the hungry. Allah will give sweet drinks in heaven who 
gives water to the thirsty. Allah will give dress in heaven to a person who gives 
clothes to the poor." 
To get peace in the life hereafter by getting nearness of Allah the rights of the 
distressed and the poor should properly be fulfilled. Helping hands should be 
extended to them when they are in danger and difficulties. 
Teacher-student relationship 
The place of teachers is next to that of parents. Teachers are the most respected 
persons. They mould us as real human beings in this world. The parents rear the 
children, but the teachers mould them as perfect men and women. 
Children are fond of imitation. So whatever the teacher teaches them, they will learn it. 
78 Islamic Studies
A successful teacher teaches us in our childhood what our sphere of activity in life 
will be. The teachers teach the students religious laws, code of behaviour, good 
manners, modesty, politeness, regularity etc. which students can use in their matured 
life to attain over all prosperity. To respect the teachers in return for their sacrifice for 
the well-being of the students is equivalent to iba'dat. 
The persons, whose untiring efforts and sacrifice have made us real human beings, 
have their rights on us. To do the duties towards the teachers we have to follow the 
following rules: 
1) To abide by the orders and prohibitions made by teachers and behave well with 
them; 
2) To convey Salam with respect to the teachers when seen and ask how they are; 
3) To listen to and abide by what they teach; 
4) To behave with them politely all the time; 
5) To stand up to show respect to the teacher as soon as he/she enters the classroom 
and to ask permission at the time of leaving the classroom; 
6) To enquire about the distress and difficulties of the teachers and try to help them 
as far as possible; 
7) Not to do anything that they dislike; 
8) Not to be impolite with them under any circumstance. 
We have to remember that the blessing and endeavour of a teacher is the key to 
our success. If a teacher is hurt and curses us, it is not possible to prosper in life. 
We will respect the teachers. We will abide by their advice. Then our life will be 
better, and we will get peace in this world and in the life hereafter. 
Relationship between young and old 
Around us we have fathers and mothers, sons and daughters, brothers and sisters, 
relatives, neighbours and friends. Some of them are older, some are younger. The first 
expectation of the older people is that they will get proper respects and regards from 
the younger people. On the contrary, the younger people also have the right to get 
love, affection and sympathy from the older. About the rights of the older people the 
Prophet (Sm) says: "As the father has rights over his son, so the elder brother has 
rights over his younger brother". 
About this the Prophet (Sm) also says: 
Islamic Studies 79
Meaning: "The man who is not affectionate towards the younger people and does 
not show respect to the older people, does not belong to our community." Through 
the respectful attitude of the younger towards the older and through love, sympathy 
and affection of the older towards the younger, a fair society can be built. 
To become a true Muslim the older should be respected and the younger should be 
shown affection. Then real peace will prevail in society. So, according to Islamic 
ideology, to respect the older and to show affection to the younger is a compulsory 
duty for everybody. 
Children like to imitate others. Whatever the older people do, children try to 
imitate that. So it is the duty of the older to help the younger to build up noble 
character and mentality of the younger. On the other hand, the younger should abide 
by the orders and advice of the older. 
In transports the older should be respected. While travelling by bus or train the old 
people should be helped to get in so that they do not get trouble. Arrangement for 
their sitting should be made if they keep standing. These are not only showing respect 
to them but also a deed of virtue. 
So to build a nice society, good relationship between the old and the young should 
be maintained. Thus we shall respect the older and show affection to the younger. 
Employer-employee relationship 
Allah Ta'ala has created human beings in the world. Everybody is working to fulfil 
his/her basic needs, i.e. food, clothes, shelter, education, health, etc. 
The capacity of all human beings is not equal. Some are owners, some are 
labourers. That is, everyone works according to his/her capacity. But from Islamic 
point of view, there is no scope of considering any work as of low grade. To work for 
others in return for wages, i.e. to receive the price of labour is not a heinous work at 
all. Our Prophet (Sm) was asked: "What type of earning is the best and the purest?" 
He told in reply: "The earning of a man by his own labour and the profit earned by 
honest business". 
Nobody should feel inferior in adopting any way to get honest earning. A labourer 
should not suffer from inferiority complex, and an employer should not think 
himself/herself superior. Basically, capital and labour are essential for the production 
of goods. Without these, the production of goods is not possible. So in the field of 
production they should be co-operative to one another. One should not think 
himself/herself superior to the others. 
80 Islamic Studies
Forma-11, Islamic Studies-9 
About the dignity and right of a labourer, the Prophet (Sm) says: "Those who 
earn their living by working for you are your brothers. Allah has made them 
subordinate to you. So, those who have such people, should give them such food as 
they themselves eat and should give them such clothes as they themselves wear. 
They should not be compelled to do the work which is beyond their capacity. If they 
are asked to do such work, they should be given proper co-operation for completing 
the work." 
It is described in the Hadith that it is oppression if the rich, who are capable, delay 
in observing the rights of others. The Prophet (Sm) says: 
Meaning: "Pay the labourer his wages before his/her sweat is dried up". Without 
any reason, you should not make any delay in paying wages. Thinking that a labourer 
should get his/her due wages, the Prophet says: "Do not engage a labourer in a work 
before deciding his/her wages." 
If the principles and procedures adopted by Islam for the employer-employee 
activities are followed, then the employee would not be deprived of his/her wages. 
There will be no misunderstanding between the employer and the employee. So for 
the prosperity of the country and the nation the Islamic guidelines in this regard 
should be strictly followed. 
Dignity to women 
Allah has created Adam (A) as the first man and Bibi Hawa (A) as the first woman 
and his companion. He then sent them to this world. So Hazrat Adam (A) and Bibi 
Hawa (A) are the first man and woman created in this world. Creation of mankind, 
male or female, begins from these two persons. 
Before the advent of Islam women were very much neglected. Even today they are 
treated as inferior socially in some religions. But in Islam women are given full 
dignity which is absent in other religions. In Islam, special rights and honour for 
women have been recognized as mothers, daughters, sisters and wives, etc. It is Farz 
for both male or female to get necessary education. 
It has been proved by the Hadith that women like men have got the right to take 
part in activities like giving shelter to the distressed, going outside wearing purdah, 
taking part in congregation in a mosque, doing beneficial and social work, running 
business, taking part in Jiha'd etc. Maintaining decorum they can do any work they 
like. But they must work maintaining proper purdah. 
Islamic Studies 81
It is the religion of Islam that has first given the women sharer of wealth. A woman 
is a sharer of her husband's and father's wealth in addition to her own. However, 
wealthy a woman may be, the responsibility of her maintenance lies on her husband. 
Islam has given her right to spend her own wealth according to her own wish. 
About the rights of women in property, it has been said in the Holy Qur'an: "The 
woman has her share in the abandoned property of her parents and relatives. This 
right whether more or less, can never be curtailed." In Islamic point of view, man 
and woman are complementary to each other, they are not competitors. But Almighty 
Allah has given supremacy of men over women. Women are the embodiment of 
motherhood. About the status of a mother the Prophet (Sm) says: 
Meaning: "Heaven for a child lies under the feet of his mother." 
There is a complete Sura named 'Sura Nisa', in the Holy Qur'an wherein Almighty 
Allah has described about the rights of women. In the Jahili (dark) age, women were 
treated like animals. They were sold in the market like commodities. If a female child 
was born, she was regarded as something ominous, and she was buried alive. Among 
all the religions and nations in the world only Islam has given women equal rights and 
honour with men. 
So, as whole-hearted followers of Islam, we must be careful in observing the 
rights of women. 
Exercise 
Multiple Choice Questions 
1. By helping whom two purposes are served: one is maintaining relationship and 
the other is bestowing charity? 
a. guests b. near relatives 
c. orphans d. neighbours 
2. What is the benefit of performing Salat? 
a. It gives access to enter into Jahannam 
b. It keeps one away from evil doings 
c. It gives honour in the society 
d. It gives long life 
82 Islamic Studies
3. Whose place is next to Allah's Ibadat? 
a. The place of teachers b. The place of parents 
c. The place of elder ones d. The place of Alims 
4. If good relationship with the neighbours is maintained, theni. 
social security is ensured 
ii. wealth is increased 
iii. mutual co-operation is enhanced 
Which of the following answers is correct? 
a. i b. ii 
c. i & ii d. i & iii 
Read the following passage and answer questions no. 5 and 6 in the light of it. 
Rafiqul Islam went out of his house to mosque for performing Fazar Salat. He found 
the Imam in Ruku. 
5. Rafiqul Islam should niyat (intention) for Salat 
i. In Arabic 
ii. in mother tongue 
iii. in his mind 
Which of the following answers is correct? 
a. i b. ii 
c. iii d. i & ii 
6. In this circumstances, Rafiqul Islam shoulda. 
go to Ruku having the niyat in his mind 
b. go to Ruku without reciting the niyat 
c. remain standing after reciting the niyat 
d. go to Ruku reciting the niyat in Arabic 
Answers the questions no. 7 & 8 in the light of the following passage: 
Belal Mia is an officer. He offers Salat and performs Roza (fasting) regularly. But he 
does not release files without extra money. He donates wealth and performs Nafal 
Ibadats. A Mufti said, "No Namaz and Roza of Belal is acceptable to Allah." 
7. What is the crime of Belal Mia? 
a. negligence in performing duties b. breaking discipline 
c. taking bribe d. misbehaviour 
Islamic Studies 83
8. The cause of not accepting. Ibadat of Belal Mia isi. 
he does not release file without money 
ii. he donates wealth 
iii. he performs Nafal Ibadat 
Which of the following answers is correct? 
a. i. b. ii 
c. i & ii d. i, ii & iii 
Answers the questions no.9-11 in light of the following passage: 
Mr. Hafizur Rahman is a rich businessman. He donates the helpless and the poor. He 
thinks that as the poor are helped through Zakat and I am also helping them Sadqa. 
So, I donot need pay Zakat separately. 
9. In the light of Islam, the thought of Mr. Hafizur Rahman is - 
a. completely correct b. not correct at all 
c. correct in some circumstances d. partially correct 
10. One of the main purposes of Zakat isi. 
to remove. the difference between the rich and the poor 
ii. to improve the eeonomic condition of the poor by removing unemployment 
problem 
iii. to change the condition of the poor in the way directed by Allah . 
Which of the following answers is correct? 
a. i b. ii 
c. iii d i, ii & iii 
11. In this circumstances, the responsibility of Mr. Hafizur Rahman isi. 
he should pay Zakat according to instructions 
ii. he should donate more and more cherty 
iii. he should do more and more for the public welfare 
Which of the following answers is correct? 
a. i b. ii 
c. iii d. i, ii& iii 
84 Islamic Studies
Creative Questions 
Yousuf Ali selected some people from his village and gave money to someone for 
buying cows, someone for goats and someone for hens and ducks in order to make 
them self- reliant. He said, "If you give me back the capital by the next year, I'll help 
you with double money, But if anybody fails to give back the capital, he/she will not 
be given any financial help next time". Yousuf Ali did not let them know that he gave 
the money from his Zakat fund. He asked some expert Alims about the matter. They 
suggested him to do Qiyas. They said that the Almighty Allah says, "The needy and 
the deprived people have rights to their (the rich) wealth." 
a. What is Qiyas ? 
b. Describe the purposes of paying Zakat. 
c. Explain the matter of making poor people self-reliant through Mr. Yousuf's 
financial help. 
d. "The needy and the deprived people have rights to their (the rich) wealth." 
Analyse this statement in the light of the mentioned passage. 
2. Sabuj Mia and Mizanur Rahman are neighbours to each other. Relationship 
between them deteriorates because of land. In fixing the border of his land 
Mizanur Rahman entered into the border of Sabuj Mia's land by some yards. As 
Sabuj Mia does job in town, so. he can't look after his land regularly. Sabuj wants 
to be rescued from this situation. 
a. Contrary to what , is the activity of Mizanur Rahman in the light of Islam? 
b. Describe the rights of neighbours. 
c. How can Sabuj Mia be rescued from this situation? Explain. 
d. How is the activity of Mizanur Rahman in the light of Islam? Analyse. 
3. During tiffin period, Rafid's friends were going to field for playing. Then Rafid 
said, "Let's go for performing Namaz". Because Allah says, "Establish Namaz" 
and He also says, "Surely Namaz keeps people away from all rasty and evil 
deeds." Listening to it, everybody but except Fahim performed Namaz with 
Jamat in the mosque: 
a. What is Namaz? 
b. "Namaz keeps people away from all rasty and evil deeds" -What does it mean? 
c. In what other ways can Rafid influence his friend, Fahim, to perform Namaz? 
d. "Social relationship is strengthened through Namaz in Jamat" -Evaluate. 
Islamic Studies 85