
Chapter - 5 
Biographies of Some Ideal Persons 
The Great Prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm) 
The social conditions of Arabia in the pre-Islamic age 
Before the birth of the great Prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm), the people of this world 
forgot the laws imposed by Allah and the ideals of the prophets and Rasuls. They were 
involved in all kinds of heinous misdeeds and crimes. Their behaviour was barbarous 
and against humanity. For that reason, the age was known as 'Ayyame Jahiliyyat' (the 
age of darkness). At that time, there was no security of life, property, reputation and 
privacy of people. Peace, discipline and regularity were altogether absent. 
Genocide, terrorism, robbery, fighting, burying female child alive, gambling, drinking, 
taking interest, adultery etc. were the regular activities of the people of those days. 
Making hundreds of idols, worshipping them and praying to them for help were their 
religion. In the house of Ka'ba they established 360 idols. In a word, they were deeply 
involved in crimes and unrighteousness. In those extremely adverse days of the 
humanity of the world Almighty Allah sent His favourite friend, the greatest man of 
all ages, the blessings of the world (Rahmatullil-A'lameen), Hazrat Muhammad (Sm) 
as a herald of peace. He was sent to show the derailed and absent-minded people the 
right and just way. 
Childhood 
The great Prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm) was born in 570 A.D. in the Quraish tribe 
in Arabia. His father's name was Abdullah and his mother's name was Amina. His 
father had died before he was born. 
The child Muhammad was a true embodiment of justice. He sucked milk from one 
breast of his foster mother Halima and left the other for his foster-brother Abdullah. 
After rearing the child with motherly affection for five years, Halima gave him back 
to his mother Amina. When he was six years old, his mother Amina died. Our beloved 
Prophet became orphan losing both his father and mother. 
Boyhood 
Prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm) was being brought up in the house of his grandfather 
Abdul Muttalib. But at the age of eight, he lost his grand-father too. Then he 
was being brought up under the affectionate care of his uncle Abu Talib. Young 
Muhammad (Sm) was active. He did not like to live the life of a parasite of anyone. He 
helped the insolvent family of Abu Talib in many ways. For extra earnings he tended 
sheep. He was an ideal to the shapherd boys. He always kept good relationship with 
the other shepherds. Once he went to Syria for business with his uncle. On the way, 
they met a clergyman named Bahira. Bahira mentioned him to be an extraordinary boy 
and predicted that he would be the Prophet of the last era of the world. 
After returning from Syria the boy Muhammad (Sm) observed the horror of the battle 
of Fijar. That fight took place in a forbidden month. Not only that the Qais tribe 
imposed the war on the Quraish illegally. So it was called Harbul Fijar or illegal war. 
That war continued for five years. In it, Muhammad (Sm) did not take part directly, 
but he saw its horrible atrocities. At this, he got terrible shock. He became restless 
hearing the groan of the wounded. The man, who would be the pioneer of the peaceful 
religion Islam, could not tolerate that unrest. So, uniting the peace-loving enthusiastic 
youths, he formed 'Hilful Fuzul' (Shanti Sangha). Nursing the sick, preventing the 
oppressors, helping the oppressed, establishing peace and order and maintaining peace 
among the tribes were the functions of that peace organization (Shanti Sangha). 
It is really astonishing that the United Nations of the modern world is indebted to that 
youth organization "Hilful Fuzul". But the difference is that while the youth organization 
could sincerely materialize their policies, the U.N.O. of today cannot do so. 
Being moved at his manners and behaviour, Ama'natdari, truthfulness etc. the Arabs 
called him 'Al-Amin' (trustworthy). After he became the Porphet, even those who 
were his deadly enemies could never say that he was a liar or untrustworthy. Hearing 
about the young Prophet Muhammad's (Sm) honesty, truthfulness and decent 
character, Khadija (R), a wealthy and educated widow of Makka, entrusted him with 
the resposibility of her own business. Taking the responsibility of her business, he 
went to Syria and earned profit beyond her expectation. While conducting the 
business of Khadija, Hazrat Muhammad (Sm) established such an instance of honesty 
as it was an ideal for the youths of all ages. On that journey, to observe and test the 
character of the Prophet Muhammad (Sm), Khadija sent with him (the Prophet) her 
reliable employee Mysara. 
Being moved with the report of Mysara about the honesty, reliability and activeness of 
Prophet Muhammad (Sm.) Khadija (R) proposed to him for marriage. Taking the 
consent of his uncle, Abu Talib, he married Khadija. At that time he was twenty five 
years old and Khadija was forty. After the marriage Prophet Muhammad (Sm) became 
the owner of huge property because of the courtesy and cordiality of Khadija (R). But 
not having spent that wealth for his own pomp and comfort, he spent it for the benefit 
and service of the distressed and sick people. When the tribes were about to quarrel 
Islamic Studies 123
among themselves for getting the rare honour of placing the Hajre-Aswad in the house 
of Ka'ba, it was decided that they would abide by the decision of that person who 
would enter the house of Ka'ba first in the next morning. In the next morning when the 
Prophet Muhammad (Sm) entered the house of Ka'ba before others, everybody cried 
out in one voice. "Look there, the Al-Amin has come, we are all pleased with him, we 
also trust him". Nobody gave any objection in his case. He settled the quarrel 
peacefully by his prudence. Thus they escaped an inevitable bloodshed. 
Peace and order is established if neutrality is maintained in settling disputes. Thus so 
many inevitable conflicts can be avoided. 
Attainment of the Nabuwat 
One night while Prophet Muhammad (Sm.) was in meditation, Jibrail (A) came to him 
with Wahy (a message from Allah), and he attained the Nabuwat. At that time, he was 
forty years old. Returning home he told Khadija (R): "Cover me with clothes. Cover 
me with clothes". He disclosed everything to Khadija (R) and said: "I am afraid of 
losing my life". Then Khadija (R) consoled him by saying: "No, this cannot be. I 
swear by the name of Allah that He will never put you to disgrace. Because you 
behave well with your kith and kin, you manage food, clothing and lodging for the 
distressed and the weak. You enable the destitute and the people in want to earn their 
living. You serve the guests and help people in the time of natural calamities." 
From this statement of Khadija (R) it is clear that Prophet Muhammad (Sm.) 
exercised with deep sincerity and devotion the excellent human virtues and engaged 
himself in the service of humanity before Nabuwat. 
Invitation to Iman 
According to the dictates of Allah, Prophet Muhammad (Sm.) at first began to invite 
his near relatives to have Iman (faith) in Allah. At first Prophet Muhammad (Sm.) 
secretly invited people to Islam. After that when Allah ordered him to invite people 
openly to accept Islam, he began to do so. At that, the idolators began to oppose him. 
They tortured him in various ways. When they tried to tempt him with leadership and 
wealth, he said: "If you give me the sun in one hand and the moon in another, yet 
nothing will dissuade me from preaching this truth." From this speech of Prophet 
Muhammad (Sm.) his devotion to truth, remarkable sacrifice, firmness and restraint 
became prominent. 
The death of Khadija (R) and Abu Talib 
In the tenth year of his Nabuwat, Prophet Muhammad (Sm.) lost his beloved wife and 
124 Islamic Studies
affectionate uncle. So he became overwhelmed with grief. Inspite of his intolerable 
sorrows and pain and a lot of tortures in the hands of the Kafirs, he continued 
preaching the religion. He then went to Taif to invite the people there to accept Deen 
Islam. The people of that place did not accept Islam, rather they made his holy body 
bloody by pelting him with stones. Even in that tense moment Prophet Muhammad 
(Sm.) did not curse the people of Taif. He begged pardon for them to Almighty Allah. 
Nowhere such an instance of forgiveness can be found in the history of the world. 
When the Prophet (Sm) was suffering from unbounded sorrows and pains because of 
unlimited tortures given by the Kafirs of Makka and the ill-treatment of the 
inhabitants of Taif, Almighty Allah took him close to Him. He went to Mi'raj. In that 
Mi'raj he was thankful getting chance to go to the nearness of Allah. 
Hijrat 
Because of the extreme hostility of the Quraish of Makka the act of preaching and the 
spreading of Islam were hindered. Then according to the instruction of Allah, the 
Prophet (Sm) decided to migrate (Hizrat) from Makka to Madina. When the Kafirs of 
Makka saw that the Muslims were leaving Makka one by one making Makka empty 
of the Muslims, they thought that the Prophet (Sm) would also leave the country as 
soon as he got a chance. So, all the tribes unitedly decided to kill him. According to 
the decision, one night they surrounded the house of the Prophet (Sm). They were 
waiting to kill him very early in the morning. But due to the miraculous power of 
Allah, the Prophet (Sm) accompanied by Abu Bakr (R) managed to be fool them and 
started for Madina. To repay the Ama'nats (the property in his custody) he kept Hazrat 
Ali (R) in his house. Entering into the room of the Prophet (Sm) when the Kafirs saw 
Hazrat Ali (R) lying on the bed, they became very furious. But they left ashamed 
seeing the trustworthiness as a custodian (Ama'natdari) of the Prophet (Sm). They 
could not think that the enemy, whom they were trying to kill, was so great and 
generous. After going a little distance, the Prophet (Sm) and Abu Bakr Siddiq (R) took 
shelter in a cave of the mountain Sawor of Makka. The Kafirs were looking for them. 
They almost came near the mouth of the cave. Seeing the movements of the kafirs 
near the mouth of the cave Abu Bakr (R) became a bit worried. The Prophet (Sm) 
said: "Abu Bakr, don't worry. Allah is with us." The Prophet (Sm) had profound 
confidence and faith in Allah. In all activities of life, he relied on the mercy of Allah. 
Almighty Allah saved him if there was any danger. 
The Prophet (Sm) reached Madina on the 24th September, 622 A.D by migration 
(Hizrat). All sorts of people, both young and old, accepted the Prophet (Sm) with 
Islamic Studies 125
earnest eagerness and love. Their joy knew no bounds. Being happy at the Prophet's 
coming in their midst, the girls of Madina sang: 
Tala'al Badru Alaina--------------- 
"Behold, the moon is there 
On the outskirts of the sky, 
The beam of it has spread over 
The whole world we ply." 
Coming to Madina, Prophet Muhammad (Sm.) sighed the sigh of relief. He bound the 
Muhajirs and the Ansars with the tie of fraternity. If the Muslims of the present time 
come forward to help their distressed Muslim brothers giving up the destructive 
actions of killing them, the Muslim world would become the abode of peace and 
prosperity even today. 
Hazrat Abu Bakr Siddiq (R) 
The first Caliph of the Muslim world Hazrat Abu Bakr Siddiq (R) was born in the 
Taym sect of the Quraish tribe in 573 A.D. He had deep friendship with the Prophet 
(sm). When the Prophet (sm) invited people to embrace Islam, Hazrat Abu Bakr (R) 
was the first among the adult male persons who embraced Islam and he accompanied 
the Prophet (Sm) all the time in weal and woe. 
During the battle of Tabuk he brought all his wealth to the Prophet (sm). An instance 
of dedicating all the property of one for the establishment of truth and uprightness is 
rare in the history of the world. Abu Bakr Siddiq (R) had profoundest belief and 
condidence on the Prophet (Sm). When the Prophet (Sm) described the incident of the 
Mi'raj, Abu Bakr (R) believed it without any hesitation. For this reason, the Prophet 
(Sm) entitled him as 'Siddiq' or faithful. After the death of the Prophet (Sm) he 
became the Caliph of the Muslim world. Taking the charge of the Caliph he said: "So 
long as I follow the dictates of Allah and His Prophet (Sm), you follow and help me. 
And if I take the wrong path, you at once rectify me. Those who are weak among you, 
are strong and powerful to me, until their Haq is realized. And those who are strong 
are weak to me until the recipient's (Haqdar's) due from them is realized." This speech 
of Abu Bakr Siddiq (R) is an ideal for the rulers of all ages. Even today if the rulers 
become conscious of their faults and try to create a mentality to rectify themselves, 
peace and order will surely prevail in society. 
After the death of the great Prophet Muhammad (Sm.) some issues were created in the 
Muslim world. Some people claimed Nabuwat falsely, some refused to pay Zakat and 
126 Islamic Studies
some renounced Islam. Then Abu Bakr (R) regained peace by subduing all sorts of 
disorder firmly. 
Preservation of the Holy Qur'an: 
In the battle of Yamama many Hafiz Sahabis of the Prophet (Sm) lost their lives. Then 
there was a possibility of the Holy Qur'an being endangered and destroyed, and so 
Abu Bakr (R) compiled the whole Qur'an in one volume. For these kinds of noble 
acts, he was called the saviour of Islam. 
Abu Bakr (R) liked to earn his living by hard work. Even after becoming the Caliph, 
he ran a business of cloth for some days in order to maintain his family. He took a 
scanty allowance from the royal treasury. 
Inspite of being a Caliph of the Muslim world, the precaution taken by him about 
enjoying national wealth would become an ideal for the people of all ages. 
Hazrat Umar Farooq (R) 
Hazrat Umar Farooq (R), the second Caliph of Islam, was learned, modest and honest. 
In his childhood, he became famous for his learning and education. He engaged 
himself in business when he grew up. He was a famous wrestler, brave warrior, poet 
and good orator. 
Embracing Islam 
At first he was a deadly enemy of Islam. He went out with an open sword to kill the 
Prophet (Sm). On the way, he came to know that his sister Fatima and his brother-inlaw 
Sayeed became Muslim. At this, he became furious and went to his sister's house. 
He became astonished seeing their firm belief in Islam. He was changed. He became 
strongly eager to be a Muslim. He went straight to the Prophet (Sm) and embraced 
Islam. Becoming a Muslim he declared boldly: "From now we will perform Salat in 
front of the house of Ka'ba openly. We will do it no more secretly." The Prophet 
Muhammad (Sm.) was glad and gave him the title "Farooq" (one who distinguishes 
between truth and false). 
Hazrat Umar (R) was a dedicated soul for Islam. He sacrificed his wealth for the 
purpose of preaching and spreading Islam. In all battles, he fought bravely as a 
companion of the Prophet (Sm.). 
Impartial judge 
The judicial policy of Hazrat Umar (R) was impartial and faultless. There were no 
Islamic Studies 127
differences between high and low, rich and poor, relatives and non-relatives in the eye 
of law. He gave his own son Abu Shahma severe punishment of drinking wine. 
Hazrat Umar (R) liked to take opinions of others in running his administrative 
activities. So he performed all important activities of the state after consulting with 
the Sahabis. 
Character 
In the character of Hazrat Umar (R) there was a unique combination of delicacy and 
strictness. He was as hard as thunder in respect of laws and as soft as flowers in the 
distress of human beings. 
He roamed about in the villages at dead of night to know the sorrows and sufferings of 
the people. Hearing the cries of children in a tent, he himself carried sacks of flour to 
their tent. He took his wife Umme Kulsum to the house of a Bedwin when his wife 
was in trouble of delivery pain. There is no such instance of showing affection to the 
subjects in the history of the kings and emperors of the world. 
The philanthropist Hazrat Umar (R) was a great ideal of equality and humanity. In 
Islamic rule, there is a provision of accountability for the rulers like that of other people. 
As a result, once Hazrat Umar (R) had to answer an ordinary person for his action. The 
man complained: "Nobody could make a complete shirt with the cloth received from the 
Baitulmal but a complete shirt of the same cloth is seen in the body of the Caliph. Where 
did the Caliph get so much cloth?' On behalf of the Caliph his son Abdullah replied: "I 
gave my own piece of cloth to my father. So his shirt was made so." 
If there is provision for accountability for our rulers, it can be expected that they 
would also be ideal rulers. 
Hazrat Usman (R) 
Hazrat Usman (R), the third Caliph of the Muslim world, was born in 576 A.D. in the 
Umayya family of the Quraish tribe. From his childhood, he was very polite, gentle 
and shy. He was also famous for his learning. He embraced Islam at the age of 34. For 
the offence of embracing Islam, his uncle Hakam tortured him in many ways. He 
tolerated all the troubles, and he remained firm in Islam. When the torture of his 
relatives reached its extreme point, he went to Abyssinia with the Prophet's (Sm) 
daughter, his wife Ruqayya. 
Service to Islam 
Hazrat Usman (R) engaged himself for the propagation of Islam being a constant 
128 Islamic Studies
Forma-17, Islamic Studies-9 
companion of the Prophet (Sm). For this purpose, he started sacrificing his riches and 
wealth generously. Once there was a famine in Madina after the Prophet's (Sm) Hijrat. 
At that time he distributed food among the distressed people. When the Prophet (sm) 
expressed his desire to extend the Masjid-e-Nababi as there was scarcity of 
accomodation, he purchased the land adjacent to the mosque and managed its 
extension. For the battle of Tabuk he alone bore the expenditure of the one-third of 
30,000 soldiers and to make the Muslim force strong against the Roman soldiers, he 
gave one thousand camels. 
Hazrat Usman (R) was gifted with enormous wealth by Almighty Allah. He realized 
its haq by spending its generously in the ill days of Islam. In this respect, he is an 
ideal for the rich people of all ages. 
Compilation of the Qur'an 
The Qur'an was recited in the local dialects in different areas of Arabia. Afterwards it 
became a complicated problem for the Muslim Ummah. At this there was a possibility 
of destruction of the unity of the Muslim Ummah. Realizing the importance of the 
situation Hazrat Usman (R) took immediate steps. He brought the original copy of the 
Qur'an from Hazrat Hafsa (R), made a lot of copies of it and sent them in different 
areas of the Muslim empire. For this, he was called 'Jamiul Qur'an' or the compiler of 
the Qur'an. 
Hazrat Ali (R) 
Hazrat Ali (R) was the son of Abu Talib. From his childhood he was brought up with 
Prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm). 
He had profound faith and confidence in the Prophet (Sm). When the Prophet (Sm) 
started propagating Islam, Hazrat Ali (R) was ten years old. In such a tender age he 
embraced Islam without any hesitation. 
He loved the Prophet (Sm) whole heartedly and carried out his orders. When the 
Prophet (Sm) started for Madina (in Hijrat), he kept Hazrat Ali (R) lying on his bed to 
return the deposited goods to the owners. Hazrat Ali (R) knew that there was risk in 
taking such steps. Yet he did not hesitate to carry out the instruction of the Prophet 
(Sm). Carrying out the order of the Prophet (Sm) was more important to Hazrat Ali 
(R) than the fascination for life. In the history of the world, there are rare instances of 
sacrificing life for the Prophet (Sm) following the path of truth. 
Islamic Studies 129
Heroism 
Hazrat Ali (R) was a powerful warrior. He was gifted with uncommon powers, 
strength and heroism. The Kafirs used to be scared hearing his name. For his special 
kind of heroism in the battle of Badar, the Prophet (Sm) gifted him the sword named 
'Zulfiqar'. The sword was the symbol of power and strength of the Muslim Ummah. 
When he conquered the well protected Qamus fort of Khaibar, the Prophet (Sm) gave 
him the title 'Asadullah' or the 'Lion of Allah'. 
Endeavour for knowledge 
Hazrat Ali (R) was a devotee of knowledge. He used to continue his practice in 
acquiring knowledge inspite of various adverse situations. He had extraordinary 
knowledge of Hadith, Tafsir and Arabic grammar. The Prophet (Sm) said: "I am the 
city of knowledge and Ali is its entrance." 
Leading simple life 
Hazrat Ali (R) led a very simple life. He did not like luxury. He did not possess 
anything that could be called wealth. He earned his livelihood by hard work. 
Sometimes he had to starve. Yet he did not complain. Inspite of being the Caliph of the 
Muslim world, he did his household works himself. His wife Fatima (R), the Prophet's 
(Sm) daughter, used to grind wheat with her own hands. She did not have any servant 
or maid-servant to help her. 
Service to Islam 
Hazrat Ali (R) was an ideal for his courage, heroism, pursuit of knowledge and 
leading a simple life. If his ideal is followed, the present restless world can find the 
path of peace. 
Some Eminent Muslim Scholars 
Introduction 
Islam is the religion of knowledge, science and human welfare. In Islam, most 
emphasis is given to exercise knowledge, wisdom and science. The first message in 
the Qur'an is: "Read" (acquire knowledge). The Qur'an is called Al-Hakim. The 
Qur'an is full of science and wisdom. It is also said here: "Who is gifted with 
knowledge, is gifted with enormous benefits." The Prophet (Sm) says: "It is Farz for 
every Muslim to acquire knowledge." He also says: "Acquire knowledge from the 
cradle to the grave." He again says: "If necessary, go to China for this purpose." 
130 Islamic Studies
The Prophet (Sm) set up an educational institution named 'Darul Arqam'. It was 
established in the house of Hazrat Arqam (R) at the foot of the mountain Safa in 
Makka with a view to spreading education. After his Hijrat, he established a 
residential educational institution named 'Suffa' on a high place in the north-east side 
of the Masjid-e-Nababi in Madina. 
After the conquest of Makka, Masjid-e-Nababi became the centre of practising 
knowledge and science. The learners gathered there coming from Kufa, Basra, Syria, 
Egypt, Persia and far-off Rome. 
With a view to spreading education, the Prophet (Sm) determined the ransom of the 
Kafir prisoners of the war of Badar, which was to teach the illiterate Muslims. With 
this end in view, he sent his Sahabis to different parts of the Islamic state. After the 
death of the Prophet (Sm), the Muslims made the practice of knowledge and wisdom 
more glorified as inspired by his ideal. They spread in various parts of the world 
taking the torch of knowledge in their hands. They set up numerous educational 
institutions and libraries. With the patronization of the Abbaside Caliphs Mansur and 
Mamun, the fundamental books of history, medicine, astronomy, etc. written in the 
Greek, Syrian, Sanskrit and Persian languages were translated into Arabic to make 
easy access to knowledge and technology. For that purpose, Caliph Mamun set up an 
institution named 'Baitul Hikmah' (science laboratory) in Bagdad. Because of the allout 
efforts of the Muslims, there was tremendous progress in various branches of 
knowledge and science. Afterwards, other nations gathered the knowledge acquired by 
the Muslims and reached the highest point in the domain of knowledge. So it can be 
said without any hesitation that these great contributions of the Muslims are at the 
root of the progress of modern science and technology. 
Contributions of the Muslims to Education 
The contributions made by the Muslims to the field of education have become a cause 
of jealousy and wonder for other nations. The Muslims provided ever memorable 
contributions to the studies like Hadith, Tafsir, Fiqh, History and Philosophy. Imam 
Bukhari's contribution to Hadith, Imam Abu Hanifa's contirbution to Fiqh, Ibn Jarir 
Tabari's contribution to Tafsir and history and Imam Gazzali's contribution to 
Philosophy are mostly remarkable . 
Ibn Jarir Tabari 
The contributions of Ibn Jarir Tabari to writing perfect and authentic Tafsir and 
History are the greatest of all. His Tafsir and the books of History are called the purest 
Islamic Studies 131
Tafsir and History. In writing the Tafsir of the Qur'an, he showed his profound 
knowledge and subtle analysing power. He collected lots of Hadith related to Tafsir 
and on the basis of those, he wrote the book of Tafsir. For this reason, this book of 
Tafsir is very authentic and reliable. In this book of Tafsir, he has discussed religious 
laws and regulations too. The title of the book of Tafsir is "Jamiul Bayan Fee Tafsir 
Al-Qur'an" and the title of the book of history is "Tareekhul Umam Wal-Muluk." 
Imam Gazzali (R) 
Imam Gazzali (R) was the greatest sufi philosopher. He gave most importance to 
religious and moral teachings. He expressed through his writing that for the mental and 
spiritual development of human beings moral teaching is essential. He established 
Sufism in Islam. He gave philosophical interpretations of the Islamic laws. He wrote 
many fundamental books on various subjects. Among them, the most remarkable one is 
"Ihyau Ulum Ad-Deen". He has established the supremacy of Islam by perfect authentic 
and logical descriptions, and for this reason he is regarded as "Hujjatul Islam". 
Contributions of the Muslims to Medical Science 
The contributions of the Muslims to medical science is certainly memorable. The 
Muslims had a great role at the root of the progress of modern medical science. 
Among them the names like Abu Bakr Al-Razi, Ibn Sina, Hasan Ibn Haisam, Abul 
Qasem Jahrabi, Ali Tabari are worth mentioning. 
Abu Bakr Al-Razi 
Abu Bakr Al-Razi was the greatest Muslim medical scientist and surgeon. He had been 
the principal of a government hospital in Jundeshahpur and Bagdad for a long time. At 
that time he became so famous that a huge number of patients came to him from West 
Asia and East Europe. During that period Al-Razi was the best among the surgeons. He 
performed operations in a better way than that of the Greeks. He wrote more than two 
hundred books. Among them more than one hundred are on medicine. The book 
entitled "Al Judari Wal Hasbah" on pox and measles was so fundamental that even the 
people of the Christian world could not make any progress on this subject before this. 
He wrote another book entitled "Kitabul Mansuri" (complete in ten volumes). These 
two books have made Al-Razi immortal in the history of medical science. 
Ibn Sina 
Ibn Sina was a world famous physician and philosopher. For his outstanding 
contribution to medicine, he is regarded as the pioneer of the modern medical science 
and methods of treatment and surgical operation. Ibn Sina wrote 24 small and 21 
132 Islamic Studies
voluminous books. Some people mentioned that the number of his books is more than 
one hundred. His book on medical science entitled "Qanun Fit Tibb" was a perfect 
(flawless) creation. There is no other book in medical science seen till today like that 
one. Dr. Woslar mentioned this book as the Bible of medical science. Because of the 
wonderful combination of all the theories of medical science, this book is considered 
to be a great compilation of Unani and Jarbi medical science. 
Hasan Ibn Haisam 
Famous vision scientist Hasan Ibn Haisam wrote more than one hundred books on vision 
science, philosophy, astronomy, medical science, mathematics etc. The fundamental 
book on the vision science called 'Kitabul Manazir', made him immortal in the history of 
the world. As that was the only book on optics, the researchers on this subject like Roger 
Becon. Newlarde, Kepler continued their researches basing on that book. 
Ibn Haisam disproved the conception of the Greeks about vision and its refraction and 
reflection. He proved that: "Light is reflected in our eyes from the external objects, 
and not the light coming out of our eyes, makes external objects visible". It was he 
who invented the magnifying glass. Though the modern scientists claim kinetics as 
their monopolistic right, Ibn Haisam discussed it in detail long before them. He 
discussed in his books the weight of the matter that varies due to the variation of 
weight and pressure of atmosphere, and he also discussed the force of gravitation. 
Though Sir Isaac Newton (1642-1727) is regarded as the inventor of the force of 
gravitation, there is no doubt that Ibn Haisam was its first inventor. 
Ali Tabari 
Ali Tabari wrote a number of books on medicine. Among those 'Ferdaus Al-Hikmah 
Fit-Tibb' or the paradise of medical science was the most significant book. This book 
was called the first encyclopedia in Arabic on medical science. Treatment method and 
procedure, the process of preparing medicine, the qualities of plants and trees are 
described in it in detail. 
Contributions of the Muslims to Science 
The Muslims have wonderful contributions to various branches of science. The 
distinguishing role of the Muslims in modern science and technology can never be denied. 
Contributions to Chemistry 
The Muslims made special contribution to a specific branch of science called Alcamy 
or chemistry. Muslim scientist Jabir Ibn Haiyan is known as the geatest chemist in the 
Islamic Studies 133
The first inventor of algebra was Al-Kharizmi. According to the name of his book on 
this subject 'Hisab Al Jabar wal Muqabalah', the Europeans afterwards named this 
subject algebra. In this book of Kharizmi more than eight hundred examples of 
various types are incorporated. He invented six formulas for solving equations. The 
book of Kharizmi was translated into Latin in the twelfth century. And from that time 
upto the sixteenth century it was considered the best and authentic book in the 
European universities. He also wrote a famous book on arithmetic which was 
translated into Latin afterwards. 
The contribution to different mathematical formulas invented by Al-Kharizmi has 
helped the development of modern mathematics which has helped various 
developments and inventions in different branches of science. 
Contributions of the Muslims to Geography 
The Muslim geographers had sufficient contributions to geography. It was they who 
first studied geology from geographical point of view and placed it in a prestigious 
position. They prepared a Surat-al-Ardh or a map of the world. Al Kharizmi, Al- 
Masudi, Al-Muqaddasi, Umar-Khayyam and Yaqut-Ibn-Abdullah made remarkable 
contributions to this subject. 
Al- Kharizmi 
Al- Kharizmi translated the book of the Greek geographer Ptolemy and added a map 
to it. Al Kharizmi accepted Ptolemy's latitude and longitude and added to it some 
description of the Muslim countries. With the endeavour of Al-Kharizmi a real picture 
of the world was prepared and that was used as a model for drawing the map of the 
world afterwards. Al-Kharizmi divided the world into seven iqlims or zones. 
Following this theory, the geographers divided this earth into seven continents 
according to the differences of atmosphere. 
Al-Muqaddasi 
Al-Muqaddasi wrote a world-famous book named 'Ahsan Al-Taqasim Fil-Ma'rifati 
Aqalim'. He travelled around various Muslim countries of the world for twenty years. 
In this book, he presented many important geographical facts of those countries and 
also added a map to it. 
Umar-Khayyam 
Umar Khayyam invented an almanac called 'Al Tarikh Jalali' after a long research. For 
this, he became famous in the history of the world. This is more accurate and better in 
quality than the calender introduced by Pope Gregori in the sixteenth century. 
Islamic Studies 135
Yaqut-Ibn-Abdullah 
The book on geography 'Mu'jamul Buldan', a book on geography, by Yaqut Ibn 
Abdullah Al-Hamabi was an authentic one. In that book, he described historical, 
national and natural condition of every place and introduced historical persons and 
mentioned historical events. 
Contributions of the Muslims to Human Welfare 
Islam is the religion of human welfare. Doing well being to human beings is the main 
principle of Islam. The Muslims have ideals which is worth following in serving the 
distressed humanity, helping those who are in want and in all types of beneficial 
activities. Hazrat Umar (R) constructed innumerable mosques, hospitals, schools, 
roads, culverts and dug canals for irrigation and drinking water. He sent his wife for 
nursing a lonely Bedwin woman who was just going to deliver of a child. If we have 
feeling like those of Hazrat Umar (R) for the poor and the distressed people, the 
sorrows and sufferings of the poor and distressed people can be mitigated to a great 
extent even today. 
The Muslims were suffering from scarcity of water in Madina. There was the only 
well named 'Ruma'. But that was in the possession of a Jew. He sold water at a high 
price. Hazrat Usman (R) bought that well for thirty five thousand Dirhams and made 
it waqf for the Muslims. 
The contribution of Hajee Muhammad Muhsin in establishing the foundation of 
Muslim education in Bengal is unlimited. 
For the benefit of human beings women also made great contribution side by side with 
men. Empress Zubaida, the wife of the Caliph Harun-ur-Rashid, managed the supply 
of water in the holy city of Makka, Mina and Arafat by diggng a canal. She did it to 
remove the suffering of the Muslims who used to come to Makka for performing Hajj. 
This canal is well-known as 'Nahar-e-Zubaida'. 
The sister of Mamluk Sultan Malik Tahir established a famous female educational 
institution in Cairo in Hijri 604. The wife of Azd-ud -Daulah set up a big hospital. 
Khatun, the daughter of Malik Ashraf, established a big college in Damascus. Jamrud, 
the wife of Nasir-ud-Daulah of Hams, too, established a college. Khanam, the wife of 
Taimur, established a college after her own name and she bore all the expenses herself. 
These Muslim women are the source of inspiration to the generous women of this age 
who have contributed to the well-being of humanity and earned international fame. 
136 Islamic Studies
Forma-18, Islamic Studies-9 
Exercise 
Multiple Choice Questions 
1. Who predicted at first that Hazrat Muhammad (Sm) would be the Prophet of the 
last era? 
a. Amina b. Abu Taleb 
c. Bahira d. Abu Jahel 
2. The name of the cave in which the first Wahi revealed to the Prophet (Sm) isa. 
Safa b. Marwa 
c. Hera d. Senai 
3. What's the name of the Caliph who moved around villages at dead of night ? 
a. Hesham b. Abdul Malek 
c. Mansur d. Hazrat Umar ® 
4. In which year was the Prophet (Sm) born ? 
a. 569 A.D b. 570 A.D 
c. 573 A.D d. 575 A.D 
Answer the questions no. 5 and 6 in the light of the following Hadith: 
Hazrat Muhammad (Sm) said, "If you give me the sun in one hand and the moon in 
another, I would not refrain from spreading this truth." 
5. What should an invitor do if some one wants to stop him from dawat (Invitation) of 
Islam by offering a big amount before him? He/she should 
a. receive the offer and stop Da'wat 
b. receive the offer first and then continue Da'wat 
c. reject the offer and continue Da'wat 
d. not receive the offer and not continue (Da'wat) 
6. Which one of the following is the responsibility of a muslim? 
a. to work in return of money 
b. to work unbiasedly and impartially 
c. to work for the fear of an influential persons 
d. to work for the request by an influential person. 
Islamic Studies 137
7. The boy Muhammad (Sm) tended sheep in the family of his unc1e 
i. for helping the poor 
ii. for gaining the experience 
iii. for helping the family 
Which of the following answers is correct? 
a. i b. ii 
c. iii d. i. ii& iii 
Answer the questions no. 8 & 9 in the light of the following passage: 
Mr. Hafizur Rahman, a distinguished man, dug a deep tube-wel1 in the village to 
reduce of water scarcity. It inspires Fahim to do welfare activities for the people. 
8. We will engage ourselves in human welfare, becausei. 
the messenger of Allah (Sm) did human welfare during his whole life 
ii. the Sahabis ® laid down their lives for human welfare 
iii. Hafizur Rahman did human welfare 
Which of the following answers is correct? 
a. i & ii b. ii & iii 
c. i & iii d. i, ii & iii 
9. The cause of Fahim's being inspired isi. 
the work was necessary 
ii. sufferings the villagers removed 
iii. it was Mr. Hafizur Rahman's responsibility 
Which of the following answers is correct? 
a. i b. ii 
c. i &ii d. i, ii & iii 
10. How can Fahim take part in human welfare 
i. by sacrificing his life for the country 
ii. by doing human welfare according to his position and ability 
iii. by fulfilling Haqqullah and Haqqul Ibad 
Which of the following answers is correct? 
a. i b. ii 
c. i & ii d. ii & iii 
138 Islamic Studies
Creative Questions 
1. After embracing Islam Hazrat Umar ® declared boldly, "From now we will 
perform Salat in Kaba openly. We will do it no more secretly". During his rule, 
when he was addressing the people, an ordinary person complained, "Nobody 
could make a complete shirt with the cloth received from Baitulmal,but how did 
the Caliph get so much cloth to make a complete shirt"? On behalf of the Caliph, 
his son Abdullah replied, " I gave my own piece of cloth to my father. So this 
"shirt was made". 
a. Who was Hazrat Umar ® ? 
b. How was Hazrat Umar's ® declaration of performing Salat in the Kaba? Explain. 
c. What lesson can we learn from Hazrat. Umar's ® fact of receiving cloth from 
Baitulmal. 
d. As a ruler the example of Hazrat Umar's ® accountability is a rare fact-Evaluate. 
2. The teacher Alamgir said in a lecture in class x, "Look! Hazrat Abu Bakr ® turned 
into an extra-ordinary man after trusting prophet (Sm)." One student asked, "How 
could, sir ?" He replied, "He was entitled Siddiq by the Prophet (Sm). He said 
about Hazrat Abu Bakr ®, "I would give return of benefaction of everybody but I 
would not Abu Bakr." Later, Hazrat Abu Bakr ® guided us as a Caliph. 
a. What was the position of Abu Bakr (R) in receiving Islam? 
b. Why is Hazrat Abu Bakr ® called Siddiq? 
c. What lesson can an emperor learn from the life of Hazrat Abu Bakr ® ? Explain. 
d. Evaluate the contributions of Hazrat Abu Bakr ®. 
3. Some naughty boys eased Rafique's sister on the way teased to school. Rafique 
knew that the boys were the students of class...x of the same school. He informed 
the matter to the headmaster of the school and sought for his help. The 
headmaster said, "During the era of Ayyam-e Jahiliyyah, there were many 
problems in Arab society, specially oppression against women. Nowadays 
oppression against women increases in our society for the erosion of social and 
religious values and want of modesty. Rafique said, "Sir, What can we do now?" 
The headmaster replied, "We don't have any alternative except following the 
ideals of Rasulullah (Sm)." 
a. What does Ayyam-e-Jahiliyyah mean ? 
b. What is meant by the want of modesty? 
c. How could the headmaster help Rafique in other way? 
D. "We don't have any alternative except following the ideals of Rasulullah." - Analyse 
Islamic Studies 139
 140 Islamic Studies 
Page: 4 
Glossary 1 : Al-Qur'an 
Page: 6 
Page: 7 
Page: 9 
Page: 13 
Page: 14 
Page: 20 
Page: 20 
Page: 21 
Page: 21 
Page: 22 
Page: 22 
Page: 22 
Page: 23 
Page: 23 
Page: 28 
Page: 28
Islamic Studies 141 
Page: 31 
Sura Ad-Duha
142 Islamic Studies 
Page: 33 Page: 36 
Page: 39 
Sura-Al-Inshirah Sura - At-Teen 
Sura - Al-Qadr 
Page: 41
Sura Zilzal
Islamic Studies 143 
Page: 45 
Page: 45
Page: 54 
Page: 55 
Page: 59 
Page: 60 
Page: 60 
Page: 60 
Page: 64 
Page: 64 
Page: 65 
Page: 67 Page: 67 
Page: 67 
Page: 68 
Page: 69 
Page: 72 
Page: 73 
Page: 73
144 Islamic Studies 
Page: 74 
Page: 76 Page: 76 
Page: 78 
Page: 87 
Page: 88 
Page: 90 
Page: 90 
Page: 91 
Page: 93 
Page: 93 
Page: 93 
Page: 94 
Page: 96 
Page: 96 
Page: 102 
Page: 103 
Page: 105 
Page: 106
Islamic Studies 145 
Page: 108 
Page: 110 
Page: 110 
Page: 111 
Page: 111 
Page: 112 
Page: 113 
Page: 113 
Page: 46 
Page: 47 
Page: 48 
Page: 49 
Page: 50 
Page: 50 
Page: 115 
Glossary 2 : Al-Hadith 
Forma-19, Islamic Studies-9
Page: 51 
Page: 52 
Page: 53 
Page: 53 
Page: 10 
Page: 13 
Page: 21 
Page:28 
Page: 45 
Page: 70 
Page: 75 
Page: 76 
Page: 79 
Page: 81 
Page: 82
Page: 86 
Page: 86 
Page: 89 
146 Islamic Studies
Page: 89 
Page: 90 
Page: 90 
Page: 91 
Page: 92 
Page: 99 
Page: 99 
Page: 99 
Page: 98 
Page: 99 
Page: 103 
Page: 103 
Page: 104 
Page: 104 
Page: 104 
Page: 108 
Page: 109 
Page: 111 
Islamic Studies 147
Page: 113 
Comments of Scholars: 
Page: 112 
Page: 115 
Page: 116
Page: 101 
148 Islamic Studies
