Chapter - 1 
Aqaid 
In the Arabic language, 'Aqaid' is the plural form of 'Aqida'. Aqida means 
belief, and Aqaid means a series of belief. Aqaid is the principal basis of Islam. The 
aspects of Aqaid are proved by the obvious Ayats of the Qur'an Majeed and pure 
Hadith. So the significance of Aqaid is unlimited. 
Islam 
What is Islam? 
The meaning of the term 'Islam' is to show loyalty, to surrender, to lead life in 
the path of peace etc. Islam means belief in Allah in heart and to remain completely 
loyal with full submission to Him, to abide by all the orders and forbiddings of Allah 
without hesitation and to lead life in accordance with the laws prescribed by Him. The 
person who complies with the laws of Islam is a Muslim. 
Role of Islam 
Islam is the only nominated religion of Allah, which is the complete code of 
life. A Muslim has to lead his/her life in the light of this code from the cradle to the 
grave. There are well-ordered social, political and economic systems in Islam. There 
are guidelines and principles for national and international interactions in Islam. There 
can be no alternative of Islam for the development of human character and in the 
formation and preservation of a progressive and well-ordered society based on the 
principles of equity and justice. 
Importance of learning Islam 
To lead the life of a Muslim, a person must follow the teachings of Islam on the 
basis of global brotherhood, unity, equity, generosity, humanity, tolerance to others' 
opinions and principles of justice. It is absolutely essential for every man and woman 
to acquire Islamic knowledge and read Islamic Studies to lead a life in accordance 
with the teachings of Islam. 
Relation between Iman and Islam 
The meaning of the term 'Iman' is faith. To believe in the fundamental aspects of 
Islam heartily, to recognize them orally and to act accordingly is called Iman. There 
exists a close and inseparable relationship between Iman and Islam. Islam is the 
outward expression of Iman. Iman maintains the same relation with Islam as the roots 
of a tree does with the stem, the branches and the leaves. The nutrients collected by 
the roots from the soil keep the stem, the branches and the leaves of trees lively and 
green. Iman produces the zeal of love for Allah and the desire to gain His satisfaction. 
Thus Islam becomes lively and fresh and flourishes in complete beauty. 
The Seven Fundamental Aspects of 'Iman' 
A Muslim must have faith (Iman) in particular fundamental aspects. These are: 
1. Belief in One Allah 
One must believe in heart as Allah to be the one and only Creator, Preserver and 
Entity deserving to get iba'dat. 
2. Belief in Malaika or the angels 
The angels are made of light. They are special creations of Allah. They do not require 
eating or drinking. They are always engaged in different activities ordered by Allah. 
They never disobey orders of Allah. It is necessary to have faith in them. 
3. Belief in the Heavenly Books (Kitab) revealed by Allah 
Allah used to send messages to the holy Prophets from age to age to lead the misled 
mankind to the right direction. The combination of these messages is called the 'Kitab' 
of Allah or the Heavenly Books. 
2 Islamic Studies
4. Belief in the holy Prophets (Nabi-Rasuls) 
The Prophets are the teachers of mankind. They led mankind to the path of Allah. The 
Prophets on whom the holy kitabs or the holy sahifas were revealed are called Rasuls. 
It is essential to have faith in the Prophets as well as the holy kitabs. 
5. Belief in the 'Akhirat'. 
Life after death is called 'Akhirat'. One has to account for one's worldly good as well 
as bad deeds in 'Akhirat'. Reward for the worldly good deeds and punishment for the 
bad deeds will be given in Akhirat. 
6. Belief in Taqdir (Luck): 
Allah controls Takdir (luck). Allah decides whether a person will have good or bad 
luck. Man should try and work. He should endeavour, but for the results of his work 
and endeavour, he should depend on Allah. One should be grateful to Him if one 
succeeds and should have patience when one fails. 
7. Belief in resurrection after death: 
All human beings will arise at the Hashar Maidan (the Field of Judgement) in the life 
hereafter. There they will have to account for their respective deeds in the mortal 
world. Their trial will be held on evidence. This is called 'resurrection'. We must have 
full faith in these things. 
What we have learnt in this lesson: 
1. We have come to know the meaning of Islam, the role of Islam in human life and 
the importance of Islamic education. 
2. We have also come to know about the deep and close relationship between Iman 
and Islam. Islam can not be imagined without 'Iman'. Again, we cannot get good 
result of Iman without practising Islam. 
3. We have learnt that Iman comprises of seven basic aspects. We will truly reflect 
our belief in our lives. We will mould our lives basing on Iman and good deeds. 
Tauhid 
Allah, the Creator of the universe, is one, second to none and incomparable. 
This belief in Allah is called 'Tauhid'. The meaning of the term 'Tauhid' is oneness. In 
the Islamic terminology, Allah is the only Creator, Preserver and Entity deserving to 
get iba'dat and loyalty. To accept and believe in this Single Entity is called 'Tauhid'. 
Allah, the Greatest, declared in the Holy Qur'an: 
Islamic Studies 3
 Meaning: "If there had been more than one Illah excepting Allah in heavens and 
on earth, they would have been destroyed." (Sura Ambia: 22) 
Importance and influence of the belief in 'Tauhid' 
Faith in Allah is the most important of all the fundamental aspects of Islam in 
which one has to believe. This is the first aspect of 'Iman'. Tauhid is the basis of faith 
in Allah. All the teachings of Islam is based on the belief in 'Tauhid'. Innumerable 
prophets beginning from the first prophet Hazrat Adam(A) to the last prophet Hazrat 
Muhammad (Sm) came to this earth for the correction of mankind, and all of them 
struggled to establish 'Tauhid'. Hazrat Ibra'him (A) was thrown into fire in this 
struggle. Hazrat Muhammad (Sm) also endured ruthless tortures and was compelled 
to perform Hizrat (migration). 
Salvation from the bonds of slavery of innumerable creations can be gained if 
the Lordship of one Allah is accepted. Those who believe in Tauhid do not bow down 
their heads before any man, matter, nature or power. The belief in Tauhid arouses a 
sense of self-consciousness and self-respect in man. This belief creates unity among 
all creations ignoring all divisions among them. Magnanimous outlooks are formed as 
a result of the belief in Tauhid. Nothing can mislead a believer in Tauhid from his 
determination. He is inspired to do good deeds. 
Who is Allah? 
Allah, the Almighty, is one and second to none in respect of Allah's entity and 
attributes. Allah is incomparable in entity, attributes, acts, powers and in all other 
respects. There is nothing that can be compared to Allah's entity and attributes. It is 
declared in the Qur'an Majid: "There is nothing like Him (Allah). He (Allah) is 
without a beginning and without an end. He (Allah) is ever alive and everlasting." 
(Sura Baqarah) 
Allah creates whatever Allah likes and controls Allah's creations according to 
Allah's own will. The moon, the sun, the planets and the stars are being controlled in 
their own orbits by Allah in a unique and wonderful system. No indiscipline of any 
kind is found here. This proves that Allah is One and second to none. If Allah had not 
been one, various types of indiscipline and collisions would have occurred in 
regulating the universe and the whole universe would have been destroyed. 
4 Islamic Studies
Kufr 
What is Kufr? 
To have faith in the fundamental aspects of Islam means 'Iman' and to have no 
faith in them means Kufr. The meaning of the term 'Kufr' is to veil, to conceal, to 
disbelieve, to refuse, to be disloyal and ungrateful. In the Islamic terminology, to 
disbelieve and disagree the existence of Allah is called 'Kufr'. In the same way, to 
disbelieve the fundamental aspects of Islam, in which we must have belief, is also 
called 'Kufr'. To bear the signs of 'Kufr', to wear the cross and paita willfully and 
openly are acts of 'Kufr'. 
Kafir 
The person who is engaged in the Kufri activities is called a Kafir. The creation 
of the whole universe is a clear evidence of the existence and oneness of Allah. The 
person who is a Kafir conceals this great truth, denies and disbelieves it. Human 
beings are always blessed with innumerable Niamats (gifts) of Allah, the most 
Gracious. Fire, water, light, air, everything are the gifts of Allah. Hands, legs, eyes, 
ears, brain, knowledge, intelligence, strength and ability of human beings are all 
Allah's gifts. Even after having these, the person who denies Allah is extremely 
ungrateful, disloyal and a Kafir. 
Consequences of the 'Kufr' 
1. The kafir is ungrateful: Who can be more ungrateful than the person who is not 
grateful even after enjoying innumerable gifts (Niamat) of Allah? The ungrateful 
person has no dignity in this world. Severe punishment awaits him in Akhirat (the life 
hereafter). 
2. The kafir is disloyal and hostile: A Kafir is disloyal to the supreme powerful Allah 
and opposes the rules and discipline, principles and regulations imposed by Allah. He 
becomes hostile to Allah and his punishment for being so is severe. 
3. Kufr is the vilest julum (tyranny): The limbs of a Kafir will complain in the court 
of Allah against himself in the field of judegment. They will say: "He/she has directed 
us to evil acts." Allah will then severely punish this hostile jalim (tyrant). 
4. Pessimism: A man becomes unsuccessful and pessimistic because of Kufr and 
disloyalty to Allah. This is because he/she has no reliability on Alllah. The 
consequence of an unsuccessful and pessimistic person is very tragic, because he/she 
cannot accept worldly failure. 
Islamic Studies 5
5. The eternal punishment: Allah says: "Those who will disbelieve, and regard my 
orders as false ones, are the very inhabitants of jahannam (the hell). They will live 
there for ever." (Sura Baqara: 39) 
Remedies 
If the Kafir, being ashamed and repentant, surrenders to Allah and expresses firm 
determination not to commit sins like these in future, he/she may expect to be 
pardoned. 
Shirk 
What is Shirk? 
'Shirk' means partnership, i.e. to believe in more than one Creator and more 
than one Lord to offer iba'dat (worship) to him. To make partner with Allah by 
regarding and comparing someone as having the same attributes as that of Allah in 
any respect is called 'Shirk'. The person, who commits Shirk, is called a 'Mushrik'. To 
equate any power or object in the iba'dat (worship) of Allah is also Shirk. 
Ill consequences 
Allah, the Holiest, says about the severity of the heinous sin of Shirk: 
Meaning: "Certainly Allah does not pardon the heinous sin of committing Shirk 
with Him(Allah). Other than this, He (Allah) may pardon any other sin of anybody 
as He (Allah) likes". (Sura Nisa: 48) 
'Shirk' is not only an unpardonable crime, it is also disgraceful to human 
beings, the best creation of Allah. Allah has created man to offer iba'dat (adoration) 
only to Allah. And Allah has created all other things for the benefit of mankind. 
Human beings are endowed with such attributes that can help them control all other 
creations and make use of them for their own purposes. 
But by bowing down before all these creations, the Mushriks disgrace 
themselves. Unrest and divisions are created in human society through shirk. 
Differences between the small and the big are also created. The Mushriks also bow 
down before different inert objects, gods and goddesses, images, natural powers etc. 
This is extremely disgraceful to humanity. 
6 Islamic Studies
Measures for getting forgiveness 
Shirk is an unpardonable sin. But if one sincerely begs Allah's pardon by pledging not 
to repeat the same and renews one's faith, Allah, the Gracious, may kindly pardon this 
sin. 
Nifaq 
What is Nifaq? 
The word 'Nifaq' means vileness, hypocrisy and cheating, having bilateral 
attitude to something. It means to express obedience externally by suppressing the 
disobedience at heart. In the Islamic terminology, concealing the Kufr and 
disobedience at heart, uttering the sentences of faith and celebrating different 
occasions for publicity of faith is called 'Nifaq'. The person who behaves in such a 
manner is called a Munafiq. The great Prophet (Sm), describing the Munafiq, said: 
"There are three traits in a 'Munafiq' : (a) he lies when he speaks, (b) he breaks the 
promise that he makes and (c) he misappropriates what he is to safeguard as a 
custodian." 
Ill consequences 
1. 'Nifaq' is the worst sin. Disbelief and disobedience remain hidden in the Munafiq's 
heart. So, they are also Kafirs. 
2. The Munafiqs are termed as 'liars' in the Holy Qur'an. A complete Sura is revealed 
describing their misdeeds. (Sura Munafiqun) 
3. The Munafiqs are more harmful than the Kafirs. They are the worst enemies of 
Islam and the Muslims. 
4. Describing the severe punishment for them in the life hereafter, Allah says: 
Meaning: "The place of the Munafiqs is certainly at the lowest stage of the hell 
(Jahannam)." (Sura-Nisa: 145) 
5. The Munafiqs hold contradictory double-ended principles. People with such principles 
do not have any prestige and honour. Nobody trusts them. The liar and hypocrite 
Munafiqs have to face miserable consequences. 
Islamic Studies 7
What we have learnt in this lesson: 
(1) We have come to know the importance of the belief in Tauhid and the introduction 
of Allah. (2) We have got ideas about Kufr, Shirk and Nifaq and we have known 
about the ill consequences that accompany them. We will therefore lead an ideal 
life as pure Mumins (really pious people) having faith in Tauhid. 
Risalat 
What is Risalat? 
The word 'Risalat' means to take the responsibility of delivering a message or a 
letter or a news or of doing some good deeds. The responsibility of prophethood or 
the designation of 'Prophet' is called 'Risalat'. In Islamic terminology, Risalat means to 
deliver the holy messages of Almighty Allah to human beings. 
The importance of belief in Risalat 
To believe in Risalat is as essential as to believe in Tauhid. We did not know 
about Allah. Allah, the Merciful, has graciously sent the Nabi-Rasuls (the holy 
Prophets) to us. They have introduced Allah to us. So, to disbelieve the Risalat is to 
disbelieve the messages of Allah. Again, to disbelieve the messages of Allah is to 
disbelieve Allah. Therefore, to believe in Risalat is an essential part of Iman. The 
declaration of Tauhid has been made in 'Kalima Tayyiba'. In it, by 'La-ila-ha illallahu' 
the declaration of Tauhid has been made and by 'Muhammadur 
Rasulullah the declaration of Risalat has been made. 
The purpose of sending Nabi-Rasuls (the holy Prophets) 
All of our activities have purposes. Allah, the Beneficient, also does not do 
anything without any purpose. He has sent innumerable holy Prophets (Nabi-Rasuls) 
to this earth, and there is a noble purpose or mission behind this. The purpose is to 
lead mankind towards the right path. All the prophets beginning from Hazrat Adam 
(A) to the last prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm) had the same mission, i.e. to teach 
mankind, to guide them towards the right path. 
The qualities of Nabi-Rasuls (the holy Prophets) 
The prophets were very learned, intelligent and wise. They were very honest. truthful 
and dependent on truth. It is not possible for one to direct others to the right path 
without being honest oneself. It was impossible to discharge the great responsibility of 
Risalat on the part of a liar and a dishonest person. 
8 Islamic Studies
Forma-2, Islamic Studies-9 
The prophets were honest, truthful and righteous. They were even ready to 
sacrifice their own lives without any hesitation in their mission of propagating the 
religion of Allah. It is not possible for any selfish, greedy and sinful person to make 
such great sacrifices. Our beloved Prophet (Sm) was a living symbol of such 
sacrifices. The Kafirs tempted him in many ways. Rather he said: "I shall not retreat 
in propagating the truth even if the moon is brought to my one hand and the sun to 
the other." 
The chain of prophethood 
The coming of the holy prophets began from Hazrat Adam (A) and the chain 
stopped with the last prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm). Innumerable prophets came in 
between the two prophets. By the chain of the Prophethood or Risalat, we understand 
the gradual coming of the prophets. 
The purpose of the coming of the Prophets was to guide mankind towards the 
right path. In the same way, Tauhid was the basis of this mission of spreading 
education. The basic structure of religion is one and the same. The religion which 
Hazrat Adam (A) propagated, was also propagated by Hazrat Nuh (A), Hazrat 
Ibrahim (A), Hazrat Musa (A), Hazrat I'sa (A), Hazrat Muhammad (Sm). When 
human beings were at the initial stage of knowledge and science, they were given an 
easy and simple code of life. This code was being spread in proportion to their 
gradual developments. The religion which was introduced by Hazrat Adam (A) ended 
and was given completion by Hazrat Muhammad (Sm). We believe in all the Prophets 
equally. It cannot be that we will believe some of them and disbelieve the others. It is 
declared in the Qur'an Majid. 
"We do not make any difference among the Prophets of Allah" (Sura Baqarah:285) 
The basic principle of Islam is to believe in all the prophets. 
Characteristics of Hazrat Muhammad (Sm): 
Hazrat Muhammad (Sm) is the Prophet of the world. He is the greatest and the 
last Prophet. The other prophets came for certain tribes or for certain countries with 
responsibilities for certain periods. But Hazrat Muhammad (Sm) was the Prophet for 
the whole world. Allah, the Merciful, says: "I have sent you as the grace to the whole 
world" (Sura Ambia: 107). He also says: "Say, O human beings, I have come to you 
all as the Rasul of Allah" (Sura Aaraf: 158). The holy books which were revealed to 
other prophets were also meant for certain tribes. 
The last heavenly holy book the Qur'an Majid was revealed to Hazrat Muhammad 
Islamic Studies 9
(Sm). It contains the proper solutions to all the problems of mankind, the present and 
the future generations upto the Qiyamat (the last day). No other prophet came after 
Hazrat Muhammad (Sm). Neither anyone will come. There is no need for any to 
come. Allah, the Merciful, calls him as 'Khatamun Nabiyyeen', i.e. the last of the 
prophets. 
The meaning of 'Khatamun Nabuwat' and the importance of belief in it 
The term 'Khatamun' means the end or the last, and 'Khatamun Nabuwat' means 
'the end of the Nabuwat' (the prophethood). Hazrat Muhammad (Sm) is the last of all 
the prophets who came for the salvation of mankind from age to age. Allah, the 
Greatest, says: "Muhammad (Sm) is not the father of any male amongst you, rather 
he is Allah's Rasul (the prophet) and the last prophet" (Sura Ahzab: 4). Another 
meaning of the word 'Khatamun' is the seal, conclusion, end etc. Sealing of a thing is 
done only when it is full or complete. Nothing can be put into it or taken out of it. 
Allah, the Beneficient, bestowed the best ideals, outstanding character and the last 
heavenly book, the Qur'an Majid, on the great prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm). It 
contains the summary of the teachings of all the heavenly holy books. It contains the 
solutions to all the problems of all ages. No other principles and codes of life are 
required after the Holy Qur'an. The great Prophet (Sm) said: 
"I am the last Prophet, there is no other prophet after me". It is a part of Iman to 
believe that Hazrat Muhammad (Sm) is the last Prophet. Otherwise, it means to 
disbelieve Allah and Allah's messages. After having so much clear and substantial 
evidence of Khatamun Nabuwat, if anybody claims to be a prophet after Muhammad 
(Sm), he will sure be a liar and a hypocrite. 
What we have learnt in this lesson: 
We have learnt the meaning and importance of Risalat, the attributes of the 
Prophets, the chain of the prophethood, the character of Hazrat Muhammad (Sm) and 
the significance and importance of 'Khatamun Nabuwat'. 
We will sincerely believe in these concepts. We will cherish proper respect for the 
prophets. We will mould our lives in the light of the ideals of the great Prophet (Sm). 
10 Islamic Studies
Asmanee Kitab (the Heavenly Book) 
Introduction 
The simple meaning of the term 'Kitab' is book. A book that contains the holy 
messages of Allah is called Asmanee Kitab (the heavenly book). A big book 
containing Allah's message is called "Kitab" and a booklet containing the same is 
called ''Saheefa.'' 
Ohi or Allah's messages used to be revealed to the prophets, so that they could 
perform their responsibilities properly. The total collection of these holy messages is 
named as Asmanee Kitab (the heavenly book). 
The importance of the belief in Kitab (the heavenly book) 
For a Muslim, it is essential to believe in the holy book of Allah as it is essential to 
believe in 'Tauhid' and 'Risalat'. This is because it is only possible to know the 
fundamental aspects of Islam like Allah, Rasul, Akhirat etc. through the Kitab. It is not 
possible to believe in Tauhid and Risalat, Allah and Rasul without believing the 
Asmanee Kitab. 
References of one hundred and four heavenly books can be found. Of them, four 
are the main and famous books and the rest one hundred are Saheefas. 
The famous heavenly books revealed to the holy Prophets: 
1. The 'Taurat' was revealed to Hazrat Musa (A) 
2. The 'Zabur' was revealed to Hazrat Dawood (A) 
3. The 'Injil' was revealed to Hazrat Isa (A) 
4. The 'Qur'an Majid' was revealed to Muhammad (Sm). 
Out of one hundred Saheefas, ten were revealed to Hazrat Adam (A), ten to Hazrat 
Ibra'him (A); thirty to Hazrat Idris (A); and the rest fifty were revealed to Hazrat 
Shish (A). 
The introduction of the Holy Qur'an (Qur'an Majid) 
The Qur'an Majid is the last heavenly book revealed to the last prophet Hazrat 
Muhammad (Sm) from Allah through Jibrail (A). The Holy Qur'an was revealed 
during the long twenty three years of the prophethood of the great Prophet Hazrat 
Muhammad (Sm). Only the Holy Qur'an still exists in its total formal shape and will 
remain so in future. This is because the Qur'an Majid has been compiled and 
preserved scientifically with much importance and care. Since this is the last and 
Islamic Studies 11
complete heavenly book, Allah has taken the responsibility of preserving it. Allah 
says: "I have revealed the Holy Qur'an and I am its protector." (Sura Hizr: 9) 
Superiority, features and significance: 
The Holy Qur'an is a general, universal and complete code of life which guides 
mankind to the path of overall welfare both in this mortal world and the world 
hereafter. This is the great heavenly holy book to guide the whole mankind of the 
world. It contains the accurate description of the activities and achievements of the 
prophets in the past and various kinds of information of the nations in the past. 
Innumerable historical incidents have been narrated in it. 
This holy book is the source of a lot of information for the historians and the 
researchers. Many scientific truths of the universe and its creation have been unveiled 
through the Qur'an. 
The serious competitions invulgar literary works which were in vogue during the 
period of 'Jahiliyat' (darkness) came to an immediate end with the revelation of the 
Holy Qur'an. Poets were astonished with the ideas and lucidity of the language of the 
Qur'an. They were unable to compete with it and were compelled to agree that the 
Qur'an was not written by any human being. Many non-Muslim philosophers also 
greatly praised the Holy Qur'an. Innumerable learned and wise persons were deeply 
charmed at the rhetorical qualities of its language, its similes, its rhythms and artistic 
diction. The language of the Qur'an Majid is excellent, incomparable and lively. 
The last Asmanee Kitab (heavenly book) 
Qur'an Majid is the last heavenly book. Allah, the Merciful, has given 
completeness to Islam with the Holy Qur'an. The Holy Qur'an is the last guide to 
mankind. 
Qur'an Majid is undistorted 
Qur'an Majid (the Holy Qur'an) exists in the same language in which it was 
revealed. It is completely the message of Allah, nothing is incorporated in it. 
What we have learnt in this lesson: 
We have known about the introduction and importance of the heavenly books, 
introduction of the Holy Qur'an, the necessity of belief in the heavenly books, and the 
superiority, the features and greatness of the Holy Qur'an. We will carefully recite the 
Qur'an Majid and abide by its teachings. 
12 Islamic Studies
Akhirat 
(The life hereafter) 
Introduction: 
Akhirat means the life hereafter. The life after the worldly and mortal life is called 
'Akhirat'. The life of 'Akhirat' begins immediately after one's death. That life has its 
beginning but no end. That life is for ever. Human beings will be rewarded or 
punished in Akhirat according to their actions in the world. The great Prophet (Sm) 
said: 
"This mortal world is the crop-field of Akhirat". This means that if our actions are 
good in the present world, we will be rewarded in the world hereafter. For our bad 
actions, we will be punished. 
The importance of belief in Akhirat 
To believe in Tauhid and Risalat is a part of Iman. To believe in Akhirat is also a 
part of Iman. Introducing the Mumin and Muttaqi (the pious believers) Allah says: 
Meaning: "They firmly believe in Akhirat as well." (Sura Al Bakara: 4) 
The great Prophet (Sm) propagated Tauhid and Akhirat more during his life in Makka. 
Those who disbelieved in Akhirat were regarded by all the prophets as Kafirs. It is not 
possible to believe in Tauhid, Risalat and the holy book (Kitab) without believing in 
Akhirat. So it is indispensable for one to believe in Akhirat to become a Mumin 
(believer). 
Belief in Akhirat makes one a responsible and honest worker. It makes him/her 
careful about the activities in this world. Because he/she believes that he/she will be 
accountable to Allah in the next world (Akhirat) for all his/her bad actions in this 
mortal world. He keeps himself aloof from evil deeds for fear of punishment in the 
next world. The believer in the next world keeps himself/herself away from evil 
doings because of his/her fear of accountability to Allah. He/she himself/herself is 
inspired to do good work with expectation of reward. Thus belief in Akhirat heightens 
the character of man. 
On the other hand, the worldly life is more important to a person who does not 
believe in Akhirat. He/she has no fear of being accountable to Allah. So he/she does 
whatever he/she likes. The person without fear of Allah in mind resorts to evil work 
Islamic Studies 13
whenever chance arises. So the influence of the belief in Akhirat on human life is 
unlimited. This belief makes human life responsible, careful, stainless and decent. 
Some important aspects of the life in Akhirat 
1. Death: 
The life of Akhirat begins just from death. Any one who was born is sure to die. Allah 
says: 
"Every living being has to take the taste of death" (Ale-Imran :185). The virtuous 
people will have less pangs of death than that of the sinners. 
2. The grave: 
The period from after death upto the day of resurrection (Qiyamat) is called the 
life of grave. Two angels named Munkar and Nakir will ask three questions in the 
grave. Even those not buried in graves, will not be excused from being questioned. 
Questions will be asked about Rab, Deen (religion) and the Rasul (prophet). Those 
who abide by the orders of Allah and the Prophet (Sm) in this world, will be able to 
answer these questions. Their graves will be the places of happiness like jannat (the 
paradise). But those who do not abide by the orders of Allah and the Prophet (Sm) 
will not be able to answer them. Their graves will be places of severe pains and 
sufferings. 
3. Qiyamat (The dooms day) 
There was a time when there was no universe at all. Almighty Allah has created 
every thing by dint of Allah's own power. And there will be a time when human beings 
will forget Allah. There will be none to utter the name of Allah. Allah will then 
destroy the whole universe. This destruction of the universe is called the Qiyamat. 
Hazrat Israfil (A) will blow a horn at the appointed time. As a result, everything will 
be destroyed. Even the scientists agree to such consequences of this universe. They 
maintain that the sun at one stage will become cold, the moon and the sun will 
become lightless, there will be collision among the planets, satellites and the stars 
leading to the destruction of the world. 
At the next blow of Hazrat Israfil's (A) horn, human beings will rise up from their 
respective graves and places. This rising up is called Qiyamat. This is also called the 
resurrection. 
14 Islamic Studies
4. Hashar 
After the resurrection, all human beings will assemble in a huge field (maidan) at 
the call of an angel. This is called 'Hashar' or 'the great assembly'. All will have to 
answer for their worldly actions standing before Allah in the field of Hashar. Those 
who had faith (Iman) and did good deeds will receive Allah's grace aud live 
peacefully. Those who had no faith and did not perform good deeds will face serious 
pains and sufferings. 
The pious will get the cool and soothing shelter under the 'Arsh' of Allah. They 
will not suffer and wait with serene hearts for Allah's orders. Human beings and Jinns 
will be able to see the accounts and records of their worldly deeds on the day of 
Hashar. Exact and appropriate trial will begin and Allah will be the Judge. The holy 
prophets and the angels will be the witnesses. 
5. Mizan (the scale) 
Our virtues and sins will be weighed on the day of 'Hashar'. The instrument which 
will be used for measurement is called 'Mizan' (the scale). Those whose scale of virtue 
will be heavier will be owners of heaven. And those whose scale of sin will be heavier 
will be the inhabitants of Jahannam (hell) 
6. Jannat (heaven) 
The term 'Jannat' means 'the yard' or 'the garden'. After the short life of the mortal 
world, the ever-happy and never-ending happy and comfortable place prepared for the 
believers (the pious) is called the 'Jannat' (heaven). All arrangements for comfortable 
living are there in the Jannat. Every thing will be available there according to one's 
choice and desire. In this regard, Allah says: "You will be given everything whatever 
you desire in the Jannat" (Sura Ha-mim Sijdah: 31). 
The Mumin (believers) will meet their virtuous parents, spouses, children and 
other relatives in Jannat. There they will gain a new and eternal life. It is not possible 
to describe the peace and happiness of heaven completely. Hadith-e-Qudsi states that 
Allah says: "Such rewards in heaven are ready for my virtuous believers as no eyes 
have ever seen, no ears have ever heard and no human hearts could even imagine." 
Allah will remain at the centre of all ecstatic pleasures and happiness in heaven. 
The pious will be able to see Allah and live happily in Allah's association with 
everlasting ecstatic peace and serenity. Allah, the Merciful, will be happy with them 
and they too will be happy by being with Allah. 
Islamic Studies 15
Who will be the inhabitants of Jannat (the heaven)? 
Allah, the Gracious, says: "The person who is afraid of standing before Him for 
giving accounts of his worldly activities and who is out of the clutches of evil 
instincts, will go to Jannat (heaven)." (Sura Naziat: 40-41) 
Names of Jannat 
In the Qur'an Majid, there is a mention of eight names of Jannat, which are as follows: 
1. Jannatul Firdaus 
2. Darul Maqam 
3. Jannatul Ma'wa 
4. Darul Qarar 
5. Darus Salam 
6. Jannatul Adn 
7. Darun Nayeem 
8. Darul Khuld 
7. Jahannam (hell) 
Jannat, the abode of ever lasting peace, is there for the beloved pious servants of 
Allah. On the other hand, Jahannam, the place of unending sufferings, is also there for 
those who do not accept Allah as their Lord, do not express their gratefulness to Allah, 
do not show loyalty to Allah and rather hostile to Allah. Jahannam is also called 'Nar' 
(fire) or Dojokh (hell). Jahannam is beset with unending sorrows and sufferings. 
There is severe punishment in hell. The sinners will repeatedly be burnt in hell. 
Skin and flesh of the body will be burnt and torn. New skin and flesh will be given to 
them again so that the sufferings of burning continues. The inhabitants of hell will 
neither die nor be kept alive in hell. That means, they will remain there in a precarious 
plight. The inhabitants of hell will be drowned in hot blood and in a sea of pus. A 
thorny and bad smelling plant named 'Zaqqum' will be their food in Jahannam. They 
will be given Hamim (very hot water) to drink when they will be extremely thirsty. 
They will also be given dirty and stinky water blended with blood and pus. The 
sinners will be burnt for a never ending duration in hell. The heat of the fire in hell 
will be extreme. The great Prophet (Sm) said: "The fire of this world is only one of 
the seventy one parts of the fire in hell". 
The sinners, at the time of giving accounts, will humbly request Allah saying: "Let 
us to back to the mortal world again. We will come back after performing virtuous 
activities". But Allah will not listen to them and they will be thrown into hell. 
Nobody will be able to escape punishment of hell at the cost of wealth or anything 
else. Sincere compliance with the prescripts of Allah and leading life following the 
path shown by the Rasul (Sm) are the only ways to escape severe punishment of hell. 
16 Islamic Studies
Forma-3, Islamic Studies-9 
Who will be the inhabitants of Jahannam (hell)? 
Allah, the Merciful, says: "The persons who will be disloyal to Allah and greatly 
emphasize the worldly life, will be the inhabitants of Jahannam (hell)" (Sura 
Naziat: 37-39) 
Names of seven Dojokhs (hells): 
1. Jahannam 
2. Habiah 
3. Jaheem 
4. Saqar 
5. Sayeer 
6. Hutamah 
7. Lajah 
What we have learnt in this lesson: 
We have got ideas about 'Akhirat'. We have learnt about the importance and the 
influence of the belief in 'Akhirat'. Moreover, we have come to know about death, 
grave, Qiyamat, Hashar, Meezan, Jannat and Jahannam. 
We will surely believe in the life of Akhirat. We will keep ourselves aloof from all 
sinful activities out of the fear of accountability and punishment. We will be careful 
about our activities. We will act for the satisfaction of Allah. We will do good in this 
mortal world so that we can live happily in the world hereafter. 
Exercise 
Multiple Choice Questions 
1. The person who believes completely in the fundamental aspects of Islam is called - 
a. Mufti b. Muhsin 
c. Muslim d. Mumin 
2. Hazrat Israfil (A) will blow a horn at the appointed time with the order of Allah. 
This time is called - 
a. Qiamat c. Hashar 
b. Akhirat d. Mizan 
3. The person who regards someone equal to the Almighty Allah. is called... 
a. Kafir b. Mushrik 
c. Munafiq d. Unreligious 
Islamic Studies 17
4. Belief in Tauhid makes human beings 
a. established on self-glory b. established on self-confidence 
and self -respect 
c. faithful to Allah d. Sympathetic to other creations 
5. The punishment for the Munafiqs will be more severe than that of the Kafirs and 
the Musriks , because 
i. The Munafiqs are the identified persons in the society. 
ii. Disbelief remains hidden in the Munafiq's heart. 
iii The Munafiqs commit more dangerous harm in the society than the Kafirs . 
Which one of the following answers is correct? 
a. i b. i & ii 
c. ii d. ii & iii 
6. The fruitful arrangement of eradicating Shirk from the society isi. 
To highlight the demerits of Shirk in mass-media 
ii. To make human beings of all stages aware of Tauhid 
iii. To eradicate Shirk from the society by introducing law 
Which of the following answers is correct? 
a. i b. ii 
c. i & ii d. ii & iii 
Read the passage and answer questions. no. 7-8 in the light of it: 
Iman has the same relation with Islam as roots have with the stem, branches and 
leaves of a tree. But Fahim could not understand the matter well from his text book. 
7. For understanding the matter properly, Fahim has toi. 
know the definition of Iman and Islam 
ii. go to any expert Islamic scholar for understanding it 
iii. study the life-history of the prophets and the messengers 
Which of the following answers is correct? 
a. i b. ii 
c. i & ii d. i, ii & iii 
8. Which one of the following is the proper example for ascertaining the relationship 
between Iman and Islam? 
a. relationship between rain and cloud 
b. relationship between light and lantern 
c. relationship between field and corn field 
d. relationship between ink and pen 
18 Islamic Studies
Creative Questions 
1. Shafiq is an S. S. C examinee. He went to the Mazar of a peer for seeking dua 
before examination. Shafiq said in his prayer, "Baba ! Bless me so- that I can pass 
well in the coming examination" Shafiq saw another student offering Sijda at the 
Majar. Returning home, Shafiq went to an expert in Islamic scholar to know about 
their prayer, Then the Islamic scholar replied "Prayer of both of them were Shirk." 
a. What is Shirk? 
b. Explain the causes of both of their prayers being Shirk? 
c. How could Shafiq offer dua at the Mazar without committing Shirk ? 
d. "Allah does not pardon the sin of committing Shirk with Him" 
Evaluate the activity of Shafiq in the light of this Ayat. 
2. Hasan kept five thousand taka deposited to Karim as Amanat. After a few months, 
when Hasan wanted to take back the money from Karim, he said, "I have spent 
the money " Karim promised to give back the money within seven days. He failed 
to give back the money in the appointed date. As a result, a quarrel took place 
between them. When this matter was brought to an expert Alim, he recited the 
following Hadith. 
a. How many traits of a Munafiq are there ? 
b. What do you understand by misappropriation of Amanat ? 
c. Describe the role of the mentioned Hadith in the said situation. 
d. Analyse the social importance of the Hadith with meaning. 
3. Shafiq met Nafis after many years. Nafis does business home and abroad. When 
the Azan for Asar prayer was pronounced Shafiq said, "Friend! let's go for 
offering Salat (Namaz)". Nafis replied, "Wait, I'll go a bit later." Finishing Salat, 
Shafiq came back and said to Nafis, "How could you be so indifferent to salat." 
Nafis replied, "Now-a-days I am busy in various kinds of business. I shall offer 
Namaz properly after setting everything in order." Then Shafiq said , "Can you 
give me guarantee that you will be alive for many years? No, 'you can't". Rather 
you know that "This world is the crop-field of Akhirat." 
a. What does Akhirat mean ? 
b. Why is it so important to believe in Akhirat? 
c. How much does Nafis believe in Akhirat? Explain 
d. "This world is the corp-field of Akhirat" Explain this Hadith in the light of the 
mentioned passage. 
Islamic Studies 19