
Chapter - 4 
AKHLAQ 
Introduction: 
The word 'Akhlaq' is the plural form of khuluqun. It means behaviour, nature or 
character of a person in general. Akhlaq means both good character and bad character. 
The good character is called Akhlaq-e-Hameedah and that of bad character is called 
Akhlaq-e-Zameemah. If the nature of a man is nice, guiltless and polished as a whole, 
then it is called Akhlaq-e-Hameedah or good character. The nature or behaviour which 
is praised and accepted in every society as well as liked by Allah and Allah's Rasul 
(Sm) is called Akhlaq-e-Hameedah or praise-worthy character. As for example, 
Akhlaq-e-Hameedah is characterised by Taqwa and other attributes originated from 
Taqwa like honesty, faithfulness as a custodian, keeping decency, Adl (justice), 
helping the helpless and the distressed, cleanliness, refinement etc. In the terminology 
of Islam and according to Islamic Shariat, the proper, decent, beneficial and just 
practice of behaviours and manners relating to mutual rights and duties of men is 
called Akhlaq-e-Hameedah. A simple and beautiful nature and good character are 
called Akhlaq-e-Hameedah. 
Importance: 
Akhlaq-e-Hameedah is a fundamental human virtue and the best asset of a 
person's life. Without it, all other assets are valueless. The worldly happiness and 
security of a person depend on this virtue. Also his/her happiness in life hereafter and 
his salvation from worldly sins are dependent on it. The more a man's nature and 
character is excellent, the more he does good things and more he is loved by Allah. 
The Prophet (Sm) says: 
Meaning: "Good behaviour is a virtue." 
Once the Prophet (Sm) was asked: "For which activity will more people be entered 
into heaven?" He said: 
Meaning: "Fear of Allah and good behavior" He further said: "Surely, the thing 
that will make a believer's balance more weighty on the day of judgement is good 
character."
To be a true believer one should possess good character. In this respect, the Prophet 
(Sm) said: "They are the true Mumins who are of good character" 
The nature and behaviour which are hated and blamed in every society, such as, 
telling lies, cheating, committing sins, breach of promise, torture, blaming and 
speaking ill of others and creating disturbances in society are called Akhlaq-e- 
Zameemah. 
Here we will discuss Taqwa, the vital force of good character and some other 
virtues originated from Taqwa. 
Taqwa 
Introduction: 
The word 'Taqwa' menas fear of Allah, performing religious activities, selfrectification, 
avoiding wrong doings and keep oneself away from danger. According to 
Islam, Taqwa means the way of life in which all types of injustices and sins are avoided 
for fear of Allah and which is led according to the directions of the Holy Qur'an and 
Sunnah. To fear Allah means to obey the orders and directions of Allah. The fear of 
Allah reflects the idea that He is our Creator and Provider and has given us the capacity 
to differentiate between good and evil and has given us power to do our work. He 
observes everything and knows what we have in our mind also. On the day of final 
judgement, we all will have to be accountable to Him for our good and bad actions. We 
will be rewarded for our good actions and punished for our bad actions. Those who are 
aware of these, will refrain from committing sins. About this, Allah says: 
Meaning: "He who is afraid of standing before Allah and keeps himself aloof from 
doing wrong, will be placed in heaven." (Sura An-Naziat : 40-41). Irrespective of 
one's nation, religion, caste and sect one can be termed as a person of good character. 
But one cannot possess real virtues unless one has Taqwa in one's heart. Islamic 
Akhlaq or real good character is actually a set of good qualities based on Prophet 
Muhammad's (Sm) ideal and Islamic education based on Taqwa. 
Importance: 
In the Islamic way of life, Taqwa is the origin of all virtues. It is a noble feature 
of a person's character. The significance of Taqwa in moulding a good character is 
Islamic Studies 87
unlimited. Almighty Allah knows everything, hears everything, sees everything and 
knows what is going on in one's mind. A person who believes all these and believes that 
he will have to be accountable to Him for his actions, cannot think about or cannot 
commit any sin. Because he knows that he can cheat all others but he cannot cheat 
Allah. The Mumin (believer) who cherishes Taqwa in him, cannot be allured and cannot 
indulge in sins even when he is in a solitary place. Taqwa is the solid fortification of 
good character. He who cherishes Taqwa feels His omnipresence. He cannot commit 
any sin. Therefore, Taqwa is the basic principle of leading an honest life. 
On the other hand, a person devoid of Taqwa cannot be a sincere and honest 
person. All his/her activities are showy and deceitful in nature. A person can indulge 
in any sin at any weak moment if he has no Taqwa in him. Allah values Taqwa most. 
He says: 
Meaning: "Amongst you who have Taqwa most are honoured by Allah most." (Sura 
Al-Hujurat: 13) 
From this lesson we have learnt about: 
1. The outline, importance and kinds of Akhlaq. 
2. The outline, importance and the influence of Taqwa. 
We will build our character according to the teachings of Islam and will observe 
Taqwa in all our activities. 
Truthfulness 
Truthfulness is one of the virtues originated from Taqwa. It is one of the greatest 
virtues that we find in a Muttaqi. The Arabic word for truthfulness is 'Sidq'. Sidq 
means exposing and expressing facts in their reality. And the person who speaks the 
truth is called Sadiq. And to prove and tell something which has no existence in 
reality is called lying. The Arabic word for lying is 'Kizb' and a liar is called 'Kazib'. 
Importance: 
Speaking the truth is a great virtue. He who speaks the truth is trusted and loved by all. 
Our great Prophet (Sm) was loved by everybody from his childhood for his truthfulness. 
Those who tell lies are not trusted and loved by others. Lying is a great sin and it is the 
root of all evils. "Lying is the root of all sins." Allah is displeased with the liars. 
88 Islamic Studies
Forma-12, Islamic Studies-9 
Influence: 
Truthfulness brings salvation and success while falsehood leads to destruction. In 
this regard, Prophet Muhammad (Sm) says: 
Meaning: "Truthfulness gives emancipation, and falsehood brings destruction." 
Emphasizing on truthfulness Prophet Muhammad (Sm) says: 
Meaning: "Be truthful, because truthfulness leads towards the path of virtues and 
virtues lead towards the path of heaven." 
Once a man came to the Prophet (Sm) and said: "I steal things, I lie and indulge in 
many other bad activities. It is not possible on my part to give up all the bad habits 
overnight. So please tell me to give up only one bad thing. The Prophet(Sm) told him 
to give up lying and the man replied that it was an easy task. Afterwards it was found 
that as he stopped telling lies, he could not do any other bad things. Because he 
thought that he would not be able to tell lies when asked about his bad activities. And 
if he confessed his bad activities, he would be subject to punishment and he would be 
ashamed. Thus by stopping telling lies, he got rid of all other sins. 
Ama'nat 
Introduction: 
Ama'nat means to recieve some thing as a deposit and to keep it safe. Generally, it 
means keeping valuable things with someone for safety. Actually one's life, property, 
dignity, honour etc. are all Ama'nats to others. He/she who returns the things 
deposited with him/her without causing any harm, is known as Amin (or Ama'natdar). 
The opposite word for Ama'nat is Khiyanat. Khiyanat means misappropriation of 
or causing harm to the deposited things by breaching the trust. A person who commits 
Khiyanat, is known as Khain or misappropriator. 
Importance: 
An Ama'natdar is trusted and loved by everybody. No one loves a Khain, and nobody 
likes him or trusts him. Emphasizing the needs for maintianing Ama'nat Allah says: 
Islamic Studies 89
Meaning: "And surely Allah ordains you to return the deposited things to their 
owner properly." (Sura An-Nisa: 58) Prophet Muhammad (Sm) says: 
Meaning: "One who lacks in Ama'natdari is not faithful at all." This proves that 
Ama'natdari is a part of Iman. Those who have Iman or faith cannot misappropriate 
things deposited to them by others. And those who misappropriate are not Mumins or 
believers in the true sense of the term. They are cheats and Munafiqs (hypocrites). 
There are three signs of a Munafiq: they tell lies, misapprotriate things and breach 
promises. 
A person who misappropriates is not only despised in human society, also he is 
despised and cursed by Allah. 
The Holy Qur'an says: 
Meaning: "And surely Allah does not like those who are Khians" (Sura Al-Anfal: 58) 
Prophet Muhammad (Sm) says: 
Meaning: "And Khiyanat brings poverty." 
Scope of Ama'nat: 
The scope of Ama'nat is very wide. Every individual has more or less some 
responsibilities in his personal, social and national life and in the international affairs. 
All these responsibilities fall in the category Ama'nat. Children are Ama'nats to their 
parents. It is a sacred responsibility of the parents to build up their children's life. 
Students are Ama'nats of their teachers. It is the responsibility of the teachers to 
educate them properly. The furniture and other assets of the school are Ama'nats to the 
students. It is their duty to use and maintain these things properly. The property and 
money deposited in the bank are Ama'nats to the manager and the employees of the 
bank. The wealth and rights of the people are Ama'nats to the administrators and 
employees of the state. It is the duty and Ama'nat of the head of the state to protect the 
independence of the state, to protect the life and property of its subjects and to fulfil 
their basic needs. 
90 Islamic Studies
Hazrat Muhammad (Sm) was a living embodiment of Ama'natdari. Even his 
enemies also acknowledged him as an Ama'natdar. Everyone called him 'Al-Amin' or 
faithful and used to deposit their money and wealth to him. During the critical 
moments of his Hijrat when the kafirs surrounded his house to kill him, he did not 
forget about the Ama'nats he was entrusted with. 
Ahd or keeping promise 
Introduction: 
The word 'Ahd' means a promise, an undertaking, a contract, a commitment giving 
word to someone etc. In Shariat of Islam, Ahd means the act of keeping one's words 
given earlier. It is also known as maintaining of wada. 
Importance: 
Keeping a promise is one of the characteristics of a person who leads his/her life 
with Taqwa or with good character. We live in society. In our social life, we make 
wada, make contracts and promises with others. It is our sacred duty to comply with 
all these promises. One who keeps his word, fulfils wada is loved by all. Almighty 
Allah also loves those who are true to their words. In this regard, Allah Says: 
Meaning: "O Believers! You keep your promises" (Sura Al-Mayida 1). As it is 
compulsory to repay our debts, it is also compulsory to fulfil our promises or 
contracts made with others. For the Mumins or true believers it is a compulsory duty 
to keep promises; it is a demand of Iman. About Iman, Hazrat Muhammad (Sm) says: 
"To a Mumin a promise is like a debt." It must be honoured. 
In the court of Allah it will be enquired whether a person has kept his/her 
promises. About the fulfilment of promises, Allah says: 
Meaning: "You will always keep your promise, because you will be asked about 
these." (Sura Bani Israil : 34) Allah says about those who do not keep their words or 
who breach their promises: 
Islamic Studies 91
Meaning: "O Believers! Why do you say such word that you do not keep?" (Sura 
Saff : 2) Breaching of promise is a most heinous offence. About this offence, Prophet 
Muhammad (Sm) says: 
Meaning: "One who does not keep his/her word has no Deen." Prophet Muhammad 
(Sm) and his close associates or Sahabis (R) used to keep their promises at all costs. 
Once the Prophet (Sm) promised to meet a man at a place. And he had been waiting 
for three days at that place to meet him in order to keep his promise. 
Adl 
Introduction: 
'Adl' is an Arabic word. It literally means maintaining balance, doing 'Insaf' or 
justice properly. It is like dividing a thing between two claimants in such a way as 
each gets equal share. In the Islamic terminology, Adl means giving a person his/her 
due share. The opposite word for Adl is Zulm. Zulm is the act of depriving a person of 
his/her due share. A court house is called Adalat, because it is the place where verdicts 
are delivered in favour of the real Haqders or the really deserving persons. 
Improtance: 
Adl is a great virtue. In the social life of human beings, the importance of Adl is 
unlimited. Adl is the basis of mutual relationship, social peace and order and good 
governance. In a society, where there is no Adl, there cannot be any peace or security. 
In a society or a state where justice is absent no peace and security prevail there. In a 
society where justice prevails, no one dares to commit any wrong. As a result peace 
and order prevail in society. Everyone can live with his/her rights and status. 
Therefore, Adl is the basis of establishing peace in society. 
Absence of Adl gives way to injustice. In a society where punishment to the 
wrong-doers is absent, injustice spreads all around like a contagious disease. And 
corruption prevails everywhere in that society and pollutes it thoroughly. The wrongdoers 
start their misactivities with renewed vigour whenever they find an opportunity. 
As a result, law and order disappears from society making life unbearable. 
An honest judge is endowed with Taqwa. He fears Allah and believes that for his 
judgement he will be accountable to Him. So he delivers judgement justly. About this, 
Allah says: 
92 Islamic Studies
Meaning: "You establish Adl, because it is very close to Taqwa." (Sura Mayida : 5, 8) 
In the Hadith, it is said that in the day of the final judgement (Hashr) there will be 
no shade except the shade of the Arsh of Allah. At that time the upright judge will be 
given shelter in the shade under the Arsh of Allah. 
Characteristics of Islamic Adl: 
Adl should be based on the Qur'an and Sunnah. In this system all are equal. There 
is no difference between father and mother, son and daughter, relatives and nonrelatives, 
high and low, wicked and gentle, rich and poor, strong and weak in Adl. One 
should not be suppressed for the sake of doing a favour to the others. In this respect 
Allah says: 
Meaning: "You give judgement according to that what Allah has revealed to you 
and do not follow their ill wills avoiding the truth that has come to you."(Sura Al- 
Mayida : 48) 
In the case of a trial speak the truth even if the accused person is your relative. 
Allah says in this regard: 
Meaning: "When you speak (about trial) always speak the truth, even if he/she (the 
person under trial) is a close relative (of yours)." 
The Prophet (Sm) was the true embodiment of justice. To him, there was no 
difference between relative and non-relative, rich and poor. Once a lady from the 
Quraish tribe was caught for stealing. The Prophet (Sm) ordered that her hand be cut. 
Some people pleaded to reduce her punishment as she came of a respectable family. 
The Prophet (Sm) got angry and said: "If my daughter Fatima is caught for stealing 
today, her hand would also have to be cut." He also said: "Listen, your previous 
nations were destroyed for lacking in this Adl." 
Islamic Studies 93
Modesty 
Introduction: 
Modesty means being polite in nature. It also means being sober in dress, 
conversation, manner and in behaviour. It also means that one should be polite, good 
mannered in his personal and social life. Modesty is that kind of behaviour which 
reflects one's good taste and refinement. One of the aims of the Islamic teachings is to 
build someone as a purified person. 
Importance: 
The importance of modest dressing, polite and decent behaviour cannot be 
exaggerated in building a happy, peaceful and beautiful society. Indecent clothes and 
behaviour arouse bestial instinct in human beings and incite one's nasty lust. As a 
result, various types of problems both in family and social life arise. Various types of 
sins are committed. To get rid of immodesty and dirty situations, Allah has instructed 
in Ayats 30-31 of Sura Nur of the Holy Qur'an that both male and female should 
control their lust and desire. He said that they must conceal the private parts of their 
bodies very carefully. Women should control themselves and protect their secret limbs. 
They should not try to expose their beauty beyond what is natural and should not go 
infront of men outside their family ties, wearing ornaments and gorgeous dresses. 
Verses 33 and 59 of Sura Ahzab clearly speak of women's maintaining modest 
behaviour. Women should be aware of their outer garments and they must not dress 
immodestly. These instructions are imposed to protect women from adultery, torture 
and anarchy prevailing in society coming down from the pre-Islamic days. Even today 
those situations are more widely prevalent. If our women abide by the rules and 
regulations of the Holy Qur'an and the Hadith, their honour and prestige will be 
protected. 
Girls should not roam about outside their houses without any necessity. If they have 
to go out, they should be very careful. Their dresses, ornaments and beauty should not 
arouse lust of men. It means that while going out, women and girls should not dress in 
such a way as that exposes their beauty to allure men. Allah says about this: 
Meaning: "You (women) stay inside your own houses and do not go outside 
wearing dresses of the women of the pre-Islamic era." (Sura Al-Ahjab: 33) 
94 Islamic Studies
Tasawuf 
The scientific study that helps human beings to acquire the knowledge about 
Almighty Allah, the Creator, side by side the knowledge of self-rectification is called 
Tasawuf. The person who cultivates Tasawuf and practises it in his practical life is 
known as 'Sufi'. There are some concepts about the origin of the Arabic word 'Sufi'. 
According to one view, the word 'Sufi' came from the word 'Souf'. The word 'Souf' 
means wool. Woollen clothes were very favourite to the religious preachers and 
worshippers of the ancient times. During the period of Prophet Muhammad (Sm) his 
devoted followers also used to wear woollen clothes. From another point of view, the 
word 'Sufi' came from the word 'Soff ' which means 'class' or 'grade'. Those who have 
deep faith in and profound love for Allah achieve the highest place near Allah. They 
succeed in doing this by performing spiritual endeavour and activities with proper 
iba'dat and submission to Allah for getting His pleasure. They are the Sufis. During 
the time of Prophet Muhammad (Sm) they used to stay in the veranda of Masjid-e- 
Nababi and made endeavour and prayed to Allah. So they were called 'As-habe Suffa' 
or the inhabitants of the veranda. According to another opinion, the word 'Sufi' is 
originated from the word 'Safa' which means purity or sanctity. Those who have made 
themselves free from all types of sins and dirtiness and have acquired perfect purity 
are called the Sufis. The desired goal of practising Sufism is to develop ideal character 
by rectifying the soul. So it is more logical that the word 'Sufi' came from the Arabic 
word 'Safa'. Because the Sufis are always devoted to the endeavour of purifying the 
soul. And it is impossible to elevate oneself in the highest stage of Tasawuf without 
Tazkia-e-Nafs or rectification of the soul. In fact, by analysing all the opinions 
regarding the origin of the word 'Sufi', it becomes clear that Tasawuf is such system of 
knowledge and activity that enables a person to have a sacred soul and reach nearness 
to Allah. At this stage the attributes of Allah are expressed in him. 
With the help of Ilme Tasawuf or knowledge of self-rectification a person acquires 
the attributes of Ashraful Makhluqat by getting information regarding the Creator and 
His creations. And in this way he/she can rectify himself/herself and reach nearness to 
Allah. In fact, the study that helps a person to build the best character, shows him/her 
the way to communicate with Allah through the knowledge regarding Him and that 
helps him/her to lead a peaceful life by abiding the laws of the Almighty and His 
Prophet (Sm) is called Tasawuf. Sometimes Ilme Tasawuf is regareded as Ilmul Qalb, 
Ilme Mukashafa, Ilme Ladunni etc. 
Islamic Studies 95
Self-rectification means rectifying one's ownself and keeping one's ownself pure 
and free from vices. In the technical language of Islam, self-rectification means 
keeping one's ownself free from all types of sins, crimes and non-Islamic activities. It 
also means correcting one's ownself. 
If you follow the path of vices and evil things, your soul will become polluted. If 
you lead a good life and do good deeds, your soul will remain holy, unpolluted and 
clean. The Almighty Allah says: 
Meaning: "By no means! But on their hearts is the stain of the ill (sin) which they 
do!" (Sura Al-Mutaffifin : 14) Allah Also says: 
Meaning: "The person who keeps his/her soul pure, attains success. And the person 
who pollutes his/her soul, is destroyed." (Sura Ash-Shams: 9-10) 
In fact, a person can attain real virtues easily by practising Tasawuf. By the help of 
it, a person can acquire the human qualities to get the real dignity of man and pleasure 
of Allah and can have clear idea about the technique of acquiring those qualites. 
Shariat is the guideline of Islam for external behaviour and conduct of man, and 
Ilme Tasawuf is a great vital force in Islam, and the internal vigour of Islam is 
originated from Tasawuf. 
Usefulness and Importance of Tasawuf: 
Human beings are called Ashraful Makhluqat or the best of all creations. Just 
before creating human beings Allah declared: 
Meaning: "Surely I am going to create my representative (human beings) in the 
world." (Sura Baqara - 30) 
Endowed with the highest glory among all the creations, it is important and 
essential for human beings to know about their creator and to lead their lives 
according to His will. And only here lie the peace, prosperity and welfare of human 
beings. 
Islam is the complete code of life for human beings. The rules and regulations that 
a human being has to follow from the cradle to the grave are given here, and to 
implement these rules and regulations of peaceful life the practice of Tasawuf is 
essential. The Holy Qur'an says: "The person who attains purity and devotes 
himself/herself to 'Ziqr' in the name of his /her Creator and performs Salat, 
96 Islamic Studies
Forma-13, Islamic Studies-9 
becomes succesful." (Sura Al-A'la: 14-15) 
It is said elsewhere: "On the day when treasure, wealth, sons and daughters will 
be of no use, only those will be benefitted who will come to Allah with pure heart." 
(Sura-Ash-Shuara, Ayat: 88 and 89) Prophet Muhammad (Sm) says: "Of course, 
there is such a piece of flesh inside human body that when it becomes perfectly pure 
the whole body becomes pure and when it becomes impure, the whole body becomes 
impure. This piece is 'Qalb' (heart)" (Bukhari and Muslim Sharif) 
In the pre-Islamic era the Arabs were always engaged in such crimes as quarrelling, 
fighting, killing and committing adultery etc. But they became a civilized, wellorganised, 
prosperous and developed nation by embracing Islam. Being properly guided 
by Prophet Muhammad (Sm), the neo-Muslims of Arabia became so deeply imbued 
with affection, compassion, fellow-feelings, friendship, co-operation and sympathy that 
they acquired the position of the most prestigious nation of the world. Following the 
preachings of Prophet Muhammad (Sm), the Muslims procured unprecedented success 
in all the areas of education, culture, religion and economy. As a result, in most parts of 
the world exceptional improvements in different fields of science and technology took 
place. Islamic civilization spread in different parts of the world. 
Though it is painful, it is true that by practising the fundamental teachings of 
Islam, the Muslims achieved immense power and glory; but that was lost in the next 
era, because they abandoned that practice. Nowadays we follow the Islamic principles 
outwardly, but we have no peace of mind and we get no benefit from our iba'dat. Its 
main cause is that we have lost our moral character because of abandoning the 
practice of the basic Islamic teaching, Ilme Tasawuf. 
In this sub-continent Islam was propagated by the Muslim saints. The basic 
foundation of their education was Ilme Tasawuf. Only the true Muslim saints can give 
someone complete Islamic education with the knowledge of Ilme Tasawuf. Our 
forefathers became virtuous, coming in contact with the Muslim saints who were the 
conveyors of the ideology of Prophet Muhammad (Sm). In the modern age if we can 
achieve good moral character by following Islamic education properly through 
cultivating Ilme Tasawuf, we will be able to revive the lost glory of the Muslims. 
In this lesson we have learnt about: 
1. Truthfulness, its introduction, importance and influence. 
2. Ama'nat, its introduction, importance, scope and ideals. 
3. Ahd, its introduction, importance and ideal stories. 
4. Adl, its introduction, importance, the characteristics of Islamic Adl and ideal stories. 
5. Modesty, its introduction and importance. 
Islamic Studies 97
6. Introducing to tasawuf and its importance. 
7. Tasawuf, its introduction and importance. 
We will practise carefully the above qualities derived from Tasawuf, and follow 
them and make our life ideal. 
Khidmat-e-khalq 
Importance: 
Almighty Allah has created whatever things are there in this universe. And in this 
vast cosmic family human beings are the best creation (Ashraful Makhluqat). As the 
head of a family has so many responsibilities towards the family-members, so human 
beings have also many duties and responsibilities towards other creatures. And 
performing these duties is called Khidmat-e-Khalq or serving the creation. Human 
beings have to perform mainly two types of duties: 
i) Performing Iba'dat to Allah 
ii) Doing Khidmat-e-Khalq or serving the creation. A human being has innumerable 
duties towards the creation. As it is a person's duty to help the helpless and distressed 
people, so he/she has lots of duties towards animals, birds, plants, trees and the 
environment. It is the duty of a person to rear and protect them. Allah becomes 
pleased if kind behaviour is shown towards His creation, and if His creation is 
neglected and is shown cruel behaviour, He becomes displeased. About this the 
Prophet (Sm) says: 
Meaning: "The whole creation forms the family of Allah. The person who is most 
sympathetic to his/her family-members is most favourite to Allah". The Prophet 
(Sm) also says: 
Meaning: "Take pity on the dwellers of the earth then He who lives above, will 
show mercy on you." 
Seeing his name at the top of the list of the favourite servants of Allah written by an 
angel, Abu-Ibn Adam (R) asked its reason. He was informed: "Allah, the Great, loves 
them most who love His creation most and dedicate themselves to their services. You 
love Allah's creation and have engaged yourself in serving them. So your name has 
topped the list." 
98 Islamic Studies
Importance of the service to the helpless and distressed: 
Man is the supreme creation amongst the innumerable creations in the universe. 
So to serve a human being is the main duty of a man. Specially, it is an important duty 
to serve the helpless and distressed people. Allah loves and helps the person who 
helps the helpless people. 
The Great Prophet (Sm) says: 
Meaning: "Allah remains engaged in helping His servant, so long he (i.e. the 
servant) remains engaged in helping his brother." 
Allah will not be kind to one if one does not serve the helpless people. In this 
regard, the great Prophet (Sm) says: 
Meaning: "Allah is not kind to one who is not kind to man." 
One man is brother to another man. So it is a duty of a man to be kind to the 
hungry, the thirsty, the sick, the insolvent or the distressed person and to try his best to 
remove his grievance. The great Prophet (Sm) says: 
Meaning: "Give food to the hungry, nurse the sick, set the prisoner free and release 
the indebted person from indebtedness." 
Ideal Stories 
One has to serve the helpless and distressed person even if he is one's deadly 
enemy. One kafir old woman used to spread thorns everyday on the way of the great 
Prophet (Sm). But one day the Prophet (Sm) did not see thorns on his way, and did 
not see the old woman too. Kind hearted Prophet (Sm) thought that certainly the old 
woman had fallen sick, and so she could not spread thorns on the way. He went to the 
house of the old woman to see what happened to her. He saw that she was really sick. 
He sat at her head and gave her proper nursing. The old woman came round and 
became ashamed at her misdeeds. From then, she did never spead thorns on the way 
of the Prophet (Sm). 
Islamic Studies 99
In the Hadith, we also find: "If one Muslim gifts clothes to another Muslim, 
Allah will gift him the clothes of Jannat. If he gives him food when he is hungry, 
Allah will give him the fruits of Jannat. If one gives water to a thristy Muslim, Allah 
will give one the holy water from the sealed container of Jannat." 
The duty of a man is not confined to serving humanity only. He should also extend 
his hand to serving animals and birds, plants and trees, worms and insects etc. He has 
unbounded duties also to preserve environment. 
Sometimes we give trouble to birds and animals for nothing. In the Hadith, it is 
narrated: "Once a woman tied a cat and stopped giving it food and drink. The cat 
died from hunger and thirst. For that the woman was severely punished." 
Sometimes children destroy nests of birds. They catch young birds. It gives them a lot 
of pain. 
Once a Sahabi (R) came to the Prophet (Sm) taking a young bird in his hand. 
Seeing the offspring the mother bird began to move around it. Then the Prophet (Sm) 
said: "Go and put the young bird where it was." 
There is unlimited need for trees, fruits and grains for the livelihood of the living 
creatures, The influence of trees and plants on preserving environment is very great. 
In Islam, as people are asked to plant trees and sow seeds of grains, so are they told to 
preserve and protect them. The Prophet (Sm) called the planting of trees and the 
growing of grains Sadaqa-i-Jaria or continuous gifts. The Prophet (Sm) strictly 
forbade destroying trees and seed-plants even during war. 
Once a man tore a leaf of a tree. Seeing that the Prophet (Sm) said: "Every leaf 
declares the glory of Allah". Islam emphasizes strongly for preserving and protecting 
water and keeping it pure and clean. The Prophet (Sm) says: "Almighty Allah has 
printed the word 'Rahmat' on everything so that we treat them kindly." 
We must be kind to the living creatures. For our own benefit and to perform our 
religious duty, we must protect and preserve these things. 
Patriotism 
Intorduction: 
By the term 'Nativeland' we mean the country where we were born and brought 
up, the place which gives us light and air for our life and also gives us fruits, grains 
and water for the nutrition of our body. We also call such a place our place of birth or 
motherland. 
100 Islamic Studies
Love for this motherland is inherent in human beings. Love and fascination for 
this land spring from one's heart. If a man is compelled to go to another land, he 
cannot forget this love for this nativeland. This love and fascination for the land of 
birth, the motherland, the place where someone played during his/her childhood, is 
called 'patriotism'. The soil, the light, the air, the sky, the weather and the variety of 
seasons and natural beauty of one's country away and overwhelm one's heart. 
The Prophets (A), saints and intellectuals had also patriotic feelings. Our beloved 
Prophet (Sm) was compelled to leave Makka due to the torture of the Kafirs. While he 
was leaving, he was looking behind at Makka and Ka'ba again and again. He uttered 
remorsefully, "Makka, my beloved land of birth, how beautiful you are! I love you 
very much. If the people of my own tribe did not plot against me, I would never 
leave you." 
Importance: 
Having love and attraction for one's own country is part of Iman. It is said: 
Meaning: "Patriotism is part of Iman." In the Hadith, it is said: "Those who spend 
sleepless nights keeping watch at the boarder to defend their country will be placed in 
heaven". Those who are the most ungrateful and not religious they are traitors and 
their character is contemptible. 
If the country is not secured, religion cannot be exercised freely and there will be 
no security for the life of the citizens. Their interest also cannot be preserved. 
Ways and means: 
One's patriotism is proved through performing one's duties towards one's country. 
If a person wants to prove his/her love for his/her country, he/she has to work for the 
country. He/she has to sacrifice much for the freedom and sovereignty of the country. 
He/she has to contribute to the development of the country. The first and foremost 
condition of loving a country is to love its people. Real patriotism is to work for the 
benefit of the people. To fight for freedom, sovereignty and security of the country is a 
duty of a Mumin. Similarly, it is a duty of a patriot to work and sacrifice for the socioeconomic 
development of the country. He/she has to work for development in the 
sectors of education, industry, agriculture, busines, etc. In a word, patriotism lies in 
the service for the people of the country. Patriotism is a noble virtue. 
Islamic Studies 101
Pledges 
We must make ourselves ideal and befitting by acquiring knowledge, education 
and virtues. We have to know our country. We must wholeheartedly love this beautiful 
land beset with innumerable rivers, which is also highly fertile and green with 
plentiful crops. We have to regard the welfare of the state as our own welfare. We 
must engage ourselves in work of development of the country. We must stand with all 
our might against the enemies of the country like smugglers, blackmarketeers, 
creators of disturbance and turmoil. We must stand against those who act against the 
interest of the country. 
We have learnt from this lesson about: 
i) Service to the helpless and the distressed, its importance, ideology of the Prophet 
(Sm) and consequence of not rendering any service to others. 
ii) Importance of Khidmat-e-Khalq, ideal stories, responsibility of human beings for 
preserving trees, plants and environment. 
iii) Patriotism, its introduction, importance, ways and means, and pledges. 
Halal Earning 
Introduction: 
Man is the best of all creations. Almighty Allah has gifted man a beautiful 
physical form as well as elevated conscience, intelligence and soul. Livelihood is 
necessary to keep the body healthy. And for the benefit of the soul, Halal earnings are 
essential. About this Almighty Allah says: 
Meaning: "You take the best and pure food that I allotted for you as your 
livelihood." (Sura Al-Baqara: 172) 
Halal earning means legal earning. The income earned according to the 
instructions and the ways approved by Allah and His Prophet (Sm) is called Halal 
earning. 
Importance: 
Welfare of mankind lies in Halal earnings. Haram or illegal earnings invite 
misfortune. Almighty Allah has created mankind for His iba'dat. And He has created 
all other things for the benefit of mankind. As it is the duty of human beings to do 
iba'dat of Allah, so it is their duty to look for Halal or legal earning. Almighty Allah 
has directed: 
102 Islamic Studies
"When you finish salat, go to your work and earn your Halal living" (Sura Al- 
Jumua: 10). The Prophet (Sm) Says: 
"Seeking Halal earnings is a Farz (or essential) after Farz." Islam does not like 
laziness, aversion to work and idleness at all. The following Hadith is its sure proof. 
The Prophet (Sm) says: "When your salatul Fazar is finished, do not go to sleep 
without working for your living". Hazrat Umar (R) said: "None of you should sit 
idle feeling discouraged in trying to seek earnings for your living". Encouraging 
people to do manual labour Rasulullah (Sm) says: 
"Nobody has taken better food than one who has earned it with one's own hands." 
(Bukhari) 
As Halal earnings may be made by manual labour, so also they may be made 
through official service or trades and business. About trades and business the Prophet 
(Sm) says: "Nine tenths of your earnings lie in business." Business should be done 
honestly. About this the Prophet (Sm) says: "The honest and trustworthy Muslim 
business man will be stay with the martyrs in the day of judgement." 
There are so many ways of Halal earnings except service and business. One can 
acquire Halal earnings by self-employment like rearing cattle, making poultry farm, 
cultivating fish, planting trees, running small or big nurseries and small scale 
industries etc. These not only provide self-employment and Halal earnings but also 
help develop a country. 
Evil effects of Haram earnings: 
Haram earnings are quite opposite to Halal earnings. Earnings got through illegal 
ways by a man having no principle or honesty are called Haram earnings. Cheating, 
fraud, trickery, adulteration, cheating in weighing commodities, stealing, robbery, 
hijacking, taking interest and bribes - all these are Haram. 
To give something to anyone for unjust and illegal benefit is called a bribe. The 
bribe is an illegal, unjust and impure income. 
Islamic Studies 103
The Prophet (Sm) says: 
"The person who gives bribes and the person who takes bribes both will be thrown 
into hell." In another Hadith it is said: "The Prophet (Sm) cursed those who give 
bribes and those who take bribes and the persons who act as brokers for them." It is 
a devilish act to earn money by taking interest, bribes or by cheating. Almighty Allah 
says: "O human beings! Take halal, pure things from whatever you get in this world 
and do not follow the path of the devil. He (the devil) is your exposed enemy." 
The iba'dat of those is not accepted if their living is earned by the haram income. 
The Prophet (Sm) says: 
"The fire of hell is the real place for the flesh that is nourished by haram food." 
From this lesson we have learnt: 
i) Halal earning, its introduction, importance and the evil effect of haram earning. 
We will be interested in halal earnings and we will refrain from haram earnings. 
Selection of Friends 
Necessity of friends: 
Man is a social being. He/she cannot live alone. In fact, the nature of human 
beings is of such kind that they do not want to live alone. Inspite of having 
innumerable pleasures in heaven, Adam (A) got impatient because of his loneliness. 
In order to remove his loneliness, Bibi Hawa (A) was created as his life-partner. So it 
is found that human life becomes undynamic if there is no friend or companion. 
Carefulness about selecting friends: 
In worldly life, no person is free from the influence or contact of friends. The 
great Prophet (Sm) says: 
"A person is influenced by his/her friend's nature and character. So assess the 
person properly whom you are making friends with". That is, a person is influenced 
104 Islamic Studies
Forma-14, Islamic Studies-9 
by his/her friends. So you have to make friends with someone observing the latter's 
nature and character. A person can gain dignity of high status by coming into contact 
with an honest friend and favourable environment. On the contrary, having 
unfavourable surroundings and coming into contact with dishonest friends, he/she 
may be ruined totally. Giving instructions as to whom you are going to make friends 
with and who you are going to work with, Almighty Allah says: 
"O believers! Be afraid of Allah and be companions of the truthful people" (Sura 
Taobah: 119). If you keep company with honest people, you will become honest, and 
if you keep comapany with dishonest people, there is every possibility of being 
dishonest. A proverb goes that honest company is heavenly, and dishonest company is 
dangerous. The Prophet (Sm) says, "Loneliness is better than a bad companion and 
having honest companion is better than loneliness." 
The qualities of an honest friend: 
Imam Gazzali (R), a great man, said, "The person with whom you will make 
friends, should possess five qualities. These are: intelligence, honest nature, not being 
a sinner, neither a Bidaati nor someone who is attached to this world." 
1) Intelligence: There is no benefit in making friends with a stupid. There is a 
proverb: "An intelligent enemy is better than a foolish friend." 
2) Honest nature: There is no good in having friendship with someone who is bad 
by nature. A friend's nature influences greatly the other friends. So one should 
select friend who have honest nature. 
3) Not being a sinner: One cannot be safe from the harm caused by one who is not 
afraid of Almighty Allah. His words cannot be relied on. One sinner should not 
be selected as a friend. 
4) Not being a Bidaati: Bidaat means the bad deed that goes against the Holy 
Qur'an and Sunnah. The man who is engaged in doing things, against the Qur'an 
and Sunnah, should be abandoned. This is because his Bidaat will contaminate 
his other friends. 
5) Not being attracted to this world: The person who gives preference to this world 
than the world hereafter is influenced by his instincts and engages himself/herself 
in doing sins. Making friends with such a man will bring no benefit. 
Giving warning about making friends Hazrat Jafar Sadiq (R) said, "Do not make 
friends with five people." 
Islamic Studies 105
They are: 
i) A liar - Because only fraudulence and deception will be received from him. 
ii) A foolish - You can expect no benefit from him/her rather you will get harm. 
iii) A coward - He will hand you over to your enemy in time of danger. 
iv) A sinner - He will sell you for a very small price. 
v) A miser - He will leave you in time of your dire need. 
It is difficult to recognize who a real friend is. A deadly enemy often comes in 
disguise of a friend and causes serious harm. The satan Iblis also came to Adam (A) 
and Hawa (A) in disguise of a friend and caused great mischief to them. 
From this lesson we have learnt: 
1) Necessity of a friend; 
2) Importance of being cautious in selecting friends; 
3) The qualities of a good friend; 
4) Whom we should not make friendship with. 
We must be careful about selecting friends. By selecting good friends we must 
pave the way to peace and prosperity in the life here and hereafter. 
Cleanliness 
What is cleanliness? 
Cleanliness means being clean, neat and pure. And cleanliness of body, mind and 
place maintained through some special procedures is called Taharat or purity. 
Importance: 
For performing the most important iba'dat, i.e. salat, it is essential that the body, 
dress and place be clean. Cleanliness or purity is part of Iman. Allah is pure (holy). He 
likes purity and cleanliness. Those who keep themselves clean and pure, are loved by 
all. Almighty Allah also loves them. 
It is said in the Holy Qur'an: 
Meaning: "Allah loves those who are holy." 
We do various types of work. Our hands, feet, body and clothes become dirty and 
dusty. Our body sweats and produces unpleasant smell. People hate it. We eat through 
the mouth, then the teeth get dirty. If we do not clean our mouth and teeth, bad smell 
comes out of the mouth. People dislike it and teeth fall out before due time. To keep 
106 Islamic Studies
our teeth clean we should brush them before our ablutions. The Prophet (Sm) says: "I 
would order my followers to brush their teeth before ablutions if it was not 
troublesome to them" Some people keep their nails and hair long. These look ugly, If 
the nail is long, it contains dirt and that goes into the stomach with food and causes 
indigestion. So nails should be cut and kept clean. Hair should be kept tidy. One day 
seeing a man with untidy hair the Prophet (Sm) said: "Didn't this man get anything 
to make his hair tidy?" Some people do not make themselves clean properly after 
coming out of the lavatory and urinal. Various types of diseases attack the body if it is 
kept unclean and dirty. The body should be cleaned properly after excretion. Taking 
bath once and performing ablutions five times a day, make the body clean and pure. 
These make the mind fresh and jolly. People get inspired to do work. 
Dresses 
We do various types of work. Our clothes get dirty. If these dirty clothes are worn, 
the body becomes sick. Various types of diseases attack. Also you cannot be in good 
mood while you are in dirty dress. People dislike dirty dresses. Giving instructions to 
keep dresses clean, Allah says: 
"Keep your dresses clean and neat." (Sura Al-Mudassir: 4) 
The Prophet (Sm) always used to wear clean clothes. Keeping the clothes clean is 
as important as keeping the body clean. Salat cannot be performed with unclean body, 
so it cannot also be done wearing unclean clothes. 
Environment 
We keep our classroom, school compounds, houses, roads, play grounds dirty and 
unclean. We throw dirty sweepings and rubbish here and there. So we do with cough, 
saliva or excretion. These make our environment dirty and destroy it. Dirty 
environment is the depot of so many diseases. It spreads deseases. It makes our life 
miserable. For perfect salat, environment also should be pure like the pure body and 
pure dress. If the environment is not clean, it becomes impossible to keep our body 
and dress clean. It is really astonishing that our crowded places like roads, bus 
stations, railway stations, ferryghats etc. are kept so dirty. At this, at any moment our 
body and dress can be dirty. The enviornment is becoming polluted all the time from 
there. If we are conscious about our environment, we can get rid of many diseases. 
Water is an important element of our environment. Pure water is essential for 
cleaning the body and clothes. So we must take care not to pollute water and make it 
dirty. We sometimes throw dirt and excretion in the water which people drink and use 
for cleaning. Do we ever think how harmful and unjust it is? From now we will try to 
Islamic Studies 107
keep our body, clothes and environment pure, clean, neat and unpolluted. We shall not 
excrete in clean water. We shall not throw dirt in it. 
From this lesson we have learnt: 
1) Introdution of cleanliness; 
2) Improtance of cleanliness; 
3) The necessity of keeping the body, clothes and environment clean; 
4) The bad effects of not keeping environment clean; 
5) The bad effects of not keeping water clean; 
We must be careful about keeping our body, clothes and environment clean. 
Akhlaq-e-Zameemah 
A series of topics are presented below relating to Akhlaq-e-Zameemah or 
denounceable behaviour and bad character. 
Cheating 
Introduction: 
Cheating means to deceive others, to breach promises, to adulterate things, to conceal 
ill qualities of things and commodities, to circulate false notes of currency, to give 
less in weight, to sell things of lower quality as things of higher quality mixing with 
them, to detain the milk in the breast of a cow before selling it (which is ready for 
sale), to spoil other's due share by giving false promises etc. all these acts include 
cheating. People cheat others not only in business purpose but also in other socioeconomic 
activities. 
Importance of giving up cheating 
In Islamic point of view, cheating is a most heinous act against humanity. It is 
equivalent to lying. Cheating is as denounceable as lying. It is an anti-social crime. 
The Prophet (Sm) says about this: 
Meaning: "The person who cheats does not belong to our (Muslim) community." 
In Islam, there are clear principles and provisions about business and trade. It is clearly 
stated in Islam that whatever you do in life there is no scope of deception and cheating. 
Islam never admits the mixing of truth with falsehood. It is declared in the Holy Qur'an: 
Meaning: "You do not mix falsehood with truth and do not conceal facts 
knowingly." (Sura Al-Baqara: 42). The Prophet (Sm) says about concealing 
108 Islamic Studies
adulteration of goods: "The man who sells adulterated goods and does not tell the 
buyer about it, will always be hated by Allah and the angels will always curse him." 
He will not be excused on the ground that the buyer saw the commodity and bought it. 
Because it was his duty to inform the buyer of the pros and cons of his commodity. By 
concealing the fault of the thing he has got continuous hatred of Allah and continuous 
curse of the angels. In fact, earnings procured by deception are Haram (impure) and 
the body built with food earned by Haram earning will be thrown into hell. On the 
contrary, one can win this satisfaction of Allah by doing honest business. Honourable 
place in heaven can be achieved by this. About it the Prophet (Sm) says: 
Meaning: "Trustworthy, truthful Muslim traders will be with the martyrs in the day of 
the final judgement." On the contrary, cheating is the habit of the Munafiqs. And the 
Munafiqs will be placed in the lowest stage of hell. As the cheat is cursed by Allah, he 
has no honourable place in society. Nobody believes and loves him. 
Cheating is fully contradictory to leading Islamic life with Taqwa. A Muttaqi can 
never adopt the means of deception. We also should try to be free from all types of 
deception and promise to live a life full of Taqwa. 
Geebat 
Introduction: 
We have a tendency to discuss the faults of others. In absence of one, we do 
scandalling and geebat of one. To speak ill of one in one's absence is called 'geebat'. 
That is, to speak such ill of other in his absence as he may be hurt if he hears it. 
Man is a social being. To live peacefully in society we must have some good 
qualities, such as having love, respect, sympathy and kindness for one another. But 
speaking ill of others, spreading slander jealousy and malice etc. are bad qualities. 
They destroy the peaceful environment of our society. 
Significance: 
We often sit idle. We do not have any work to do. At that time we criticize others 
unnecessarily. We speak ill of others. We discuss the faults of others. Those who are 
good people express the merits of others, not their demerits. Those who are bad 
themselves think that others are bad too. They do not see the virtues of others and 
always try to find faults with them and speak ill of them. 
Islamic Studies 109
Bad effect: 
As geebat destroys social peace, so it is haram (prohibited) in the Islamic Shariat. 
As per Islamic teachings, to eat the flesh of own dead brother is heinous. Like this, 
geebat is a heinous and hateful act. In this respect, Allah says: 
Meaning: "Do not do geebat to others. Do anyone of you like to eat the flesh of 
your dead brother? No. you do not." (Al-Hujurat: 12) 
Slander 
Introduction: 
Spreading others faults and scandals and speaking ill of others behind their back 
are called slander. Slander means blaming or defaming someone. Slander creates 
enmity among people and destroys peace in society. He who speaks ill of others is 
believed by none and nobody loves him. Speaking ill of one to others destroys mutual 
relationship and creates disputes. As slandering is a hateful act in society, it is 
considered a hateful act to Allah also. Allah, the Great, has seriously prohibited this 
saying: 
Meaning: "Do not go to find fault with others". About the consequence of slander 
the great Prophet (Sm) says: "Slanderer will not be placed in heaven" (Bukhari and 
Muslim). He also says: "Do not go to find fault with others, do not spy on others, do 
not quarrel among yourselves, do not cherish envy and malice for others, do not 
hate one another and do not play any trick for doing harm to others. Try to become 
a real servant of Allah and be brothers to one another." (Bukhari and Muslim) 
One day, getting on the 'Mimber', the Prophet (Sm) spoke loudly: "Oh people! 
Among you there are some persons, who have accepted Islam orally but it has not 
entered into their hearts. You do not inflict pain on any Muslim. Do not speak ill of 
them and do not go to find fault with them. Because Allah will search out the faults 
of that person who goes to find fault with his Muslim brother. And Allah will 
disgrace the person whose faults He detects even if he stays in his own house." 
Envy and Malice 
We live in society. In a society respect, sympathy, good relationship and love 
towards others make social life peaceful and pleasant. On the other hand, envy, malice 
110 Islamic Studies
and quarrels among us make life poisonous. For this, our social life becomes 
miserable. Of the bad aspects of human character, envy and malice are the most 
harmful. Pride, jealousy, ill-will, to do harm to others, enmity are intermingled with 
envy and malice. Thinking one's ownself to be great and hating others, having feelings 
of enmity towards others, and wishing harm to others are called envy and malice. 
An envious person cannot tolerate any good of other people. This type of 
behaviour is quite contradictory to Islam. The great Prophet (Sm) says: "Good wishes 
and good will among one another is Deen." A malignant person always behaves 
against this great preaching and destroys the main spirit of Islam. 
Giving warning against the fatal effect of malice and envy the Prophet (Sm) says: 
"Beware of envy. Because envy devours your good deeds as fire devours dry 
timber." (Abu Dawood). From this Hadith of the Prophet (Sm) it can be realized how 
much harmful envy and malice is for Deen Islam. The Prophet (Sm) also says: "The 
destructive diseases of your forefathers, hatred and envy are crawling towards you. 
I am not talking about shaving hair, I am talking about the destruction of your 
Deen." (Ahamad and Tirmizy) 
Quarrel and Dispute 
Islam is a peaceful, disciplined system of life. In Islam, there are unity, fraternity, 
equality, friendship, generosity and tolerance. There is no room for disturbance, 
disorder and dispute or quarrel in Islam. In rules and regulations customs and rituals of 
Islam, there exist the teachings of discipline. In the performing of salat in jamat strict 
discipline is taught. People have to stand behind the Imam in rows. In Ruku and Sijdah, 
in getting up and sitting down they have to follow the Imam. From this, we get the 
teachings of following the leader. There is no disorder in the creation of Allah. In the 
domain of nature there prevails strict discipline. It is absolutely necessary for us to 
abide by rules and regulations and discipline in all spheres of life. Almighty Allah says: 
"Do not create disorderly situation in this disciplined world." (Sura: Al-A'raf: 52) 
He Also says: 
Islamic Studies 111
"Do not create disorder in the world, surely Allah does not like the people who 
create disorder." (Sura Al- Qasas : 77) 
We can realize from the following small verse (Ayat) of the Holy Qur'an how 
disgraceful quarrel, dispute and indiscipline are. Almighty Allah says: 
"Disputes and quarrels are more disgraceful than murder." (Sura Al- Baqara: 191) 
Ideal story 
Prosperity or downfall of a nation depends on its maintaning law, order and 
discipline. The Muslim had to pay heavily in the war of Uhud for breaking discipline. 
Rasul (Sm) engaged a platoon of archers numbering fifty in the mountain pass of 
Uhud under the command of Abdullah Ibn Zubair (R). They were ordered not to leave 
the mountain pass unprotected. But the archers left the mountain pass thinking that 
they had won the battle. They did not abide by the order of their leader. Seeing the 
mountain pass unprotected the Kafir Commander-in-chief attacked them from behind. 
The fleeing Kafirs also turned round. At this, the course of the battle took the opposite 
turn. In that battle, the Muslims were not defeated but they were in great trouble for 
the time being and they had to pay for breaking the discipline. A lot of Sahabis lost 
their lives. 
We must dissuade ourselves from creating all types of quarrels, disputes and 
disorders. We must also try to dissuade others from doing these. We will settle all 
types of quarrels that arise in society. We must stand against all types of destructive, 
harmful and evil endeavours in society. 
From this we have learnt: 
1. Intorduction to geebat, its significance and bad effects. 
2. Intorduction to slander and the importance of giving it up. 
3. Intorduction to envy and malice and its bad effects. 
4. Importance of giving up quarrels and disputes. 
5. An ideal story. 
We must keep ourselves free from all these vices. We must build a decent and orderly 
society. 
Smoking and drug addiction 
Almighty Allah has created human beings as Ashraful Makhlukat (the best of His 
creations). Then He has given them the means of and directions for leading life in a 
112 Islamic Studies
Forma-15, Islamic Studies-9 
decent way. He has made those things Halal for them which are beneficial, pure, good 
and delicious. And He has made those things Haram for them which are impure, 
distasteful and harmful. 
Almighty Allah says: 
"Take food from those pure things which I have given you for your living." (Sura 
Ta-ha : 81) 
The things which are beneficial to human beings should be accepted and those 
harmful should be rejected. In spite of some clear principles about acceptance and 
rejection laid down by Allah and Allah's Rasul (Sm), some people are allured by the 
harmful things which have to be rejected and bring destruction upon themselves, their 
family and society. They become slaves of dangerously bad habits. Smoking and drug 
addiction are this type of harmful bad habits. 
Smoking: 
In Islamic ideology, all types of smoking are crime. Smoking is a waste of money. In 
Islam any type of unnecessary expenditure and wastage of money is prohibited. Almighty 
Allah called those people who are extravagant the brothers of Satan. Allah says: 
Meaning: "Surely the extravagant people are brothers of Satan." (Sura Bani Israil: 27) 
Smoking is not only a waste of money, but also dangerously harmful. The bad smell 
of burning tobacco coming from cigarette, churut, bidi and hooka is so irritating that 
every non-smoker can realize it. Saying one's prayers to Allah with bad smell is 
forbidden. The great Prophet (Sm) says: "The man who takes stinky things should 
not go near the mosque (in that state). So smoking stands in the way of Allah's 
accepting one's prayers." The bad smell coming out of the mouth of the smokers 
gives trouble to the Musallis. 
Many times smokers try to manage the money spent on smoking by dishonest 
earnings. Smoking involves a person in committing sin in this way. The bad habit of 
smoking makes people addicted, and all types of addictions are Haram (forbidden). 
The Prophet (Sm) says: 
Meaning: "All types of intoxicant objects are Haram." Addiction to smoking brings 
ruin to one's family and society. 
Islamic Studies 113
The cigaratte wrapped in a clean paper is attractive. Yet it is full of poisonous 
necotine. Nicotine is so dangerous that if that substance (nicotine) contained in two 
cigarettes pushed in the body of a healthy person, it will surely cause his/her death. 
The famous physician Ibn Sina said: "If the dust, smoke and gas of this world 
would not enter into lungs of people, they could live thousands of years in healthy 
state." 
According to the specialists, "From a burning cigarette minimum four thousand 
types of chemicals come out." 
Smoking causes phthisis, bronchities, tooth decay, loss of appetite, gastric ulcer, 
cancer to the lungs, heart disease etc. 
Cigarette does not burn itself only, also burns others. Smoking is not only 
dangerous for the smoker, it is also fatal for the non-smokers around him. 
The irritating and dirty smoke from the burning tobacco pollutes air, water and in 
fact, the whole environment. If there are non-smokers like women, children and old 
women in the house of a smoker, they also inhale smoke-poison equally. They are 
susceptible to lung cancer three times more than they would have been under normal 
condition. 
It is not enough to say that smoking is equivalent to taking poison, rather it is 
more dangerous than that. Because poison is harmful only for the person who takes it. 
But smoking is harmful to the smoker as well as for those who are non-smokers living 
around him. It is also harmful to the smoker's next generation. 
Remedies: 
Will-force: Will force can play a vital-role for giving up the habit of smoking. The 
month of Ramadan is a proper time for a Muslim to give up smoking. 
Islamic teachings: It becomes easy to give up smoking if Islamic teachings, rules and 
regulations are observed properly. 
Social resistance: It is essential for the people who are conscious about society, 
health and hygiene, to put up a strong resistance against smoking. Smoking should be 
stopped for the welfare of the nearest and dearest ones in the family like sons, 
daughters, the wife and the old parents. 
Publicity by media: The publicity by media, such as newspaper, radio, television etc. 
can play an effective role for the prevention of smoking. 
Creating consciousness: It is essential to make people aware of the harmful sideeffects 
of smoking. 
114 Islamic Studies
Initiatives of the physicians: Physicians can contribute much to the prohibition of 
smoking. 
The role of the mosques and the Ulama: The Imams of the mosques and the Alim 
community can make people conscious of the harmful effects of smoking. 
Drug addiction 
Drug addiction means addiction or intoxication created by any type of intoxicating 
drug. Introducing intoxicants the great Prophet (Sm) says: 
"Intoxicant is that thing which destroys sensibility and intellect." Anything that 
creates intoxication, causes disorder in the normal brain and abolishes sense and 
memory. About this the Prophet (Sm) says: 
"Anyting that creates intoxication is called intoxicant or drug and all types of 
intoxicants are Haram (forbidden)." (Muslim) 
Whether the drug is natural or chemical, whether it is much or less in quantity, 
whether it is drunk or eaten or taken in any way, if it creates addiction and lunacy, it is 
drug, and addiction to it is called drug addiction. 
Drugs 
The things included in drugs are wine, ganza, tari, opium, charash, hashish, bhang, 
marijuana, heroin, morphine, pathedrin, valium, sonaril, cocain, mendrecs politamin, 
codain, phensidyl etc. 
Evil effects: 
Because of the dangerous effects of drugs and the sad consequences of its users, 
Almighty Allah has vehemently forbidden taking drugs. Giving instrucions to the 
Mumins for keeping themselves away from the clasp of drugs, He said: 
Meaning: "Surely wine, gambling, idolatry and lottery are profane and the acts of 
the devil. So you must keep yourself away from these, so that you can attain 
success." (Sura Al-Mayida: 90) 
Islamic Studies 115
The harmful effets of drug addiction: 
Religious: It is unholy and the act of satan that takes people away from the 
path of Allah, A drug addicted person will never get entrance into heaven. The great 
Prophet (Sm) says: 
Meaning: "A drug addicted man will not enter into heaven." 
The Prophet (Sm) cursed ten type people who are connected with drug : He/she (1) 
who extracts juice, (2) who prepares the drug, (3) who drinks it, (4) who makes 
someone drink, (5) who imports it, (6) whom it is imported to, (7) who sells it, (8) 
who buys it, (9) who supplies it and (10) who consumes its dividend. (Tirmizi) 
Physical: Drug addiction causes serious harm on the human body. It destroys 
digestive power, creates aversion to food. Malnutrition takes shelter in the body. 
Permanent cough and fatal diseases like tuberculosis are formed. Not only that, the 
children also inherit the effects of drug addiction. Children become weak and foolish. 
Liver and kidney are destroyed. 
Mental: Taking drugs diminishes the conscience of man. Power of sensation becomes 
weak. Equilibrium is lost. According to the physicians and health scientists, its effect 
remains on the body even after consciousness is gained. This may lead a man to 
madness. Drugs never become part of a body or it does not create blood. Only a 
temporary excitement in the blood is produced. This sudden excitement in the blood 
sometimes becomes the cause of death too. Quarrels, disputes and family conflicts are 
also created due to drug addiction. If a person, involved in important responsibilities 
of the state and becomes drug addicted, then the defensive and tactful policies of the 
state may be handed over to the enemies by him. 
Decadence of moral and social values: Drug addiction creates moral and social 
decadence. It makes one mentally distrurbed, restless and indisciplined. Most of the 
heinous crimes like adultery and murder are the consequences of drug addiction. Most 
of the accidents of vehicles take place due to drug addicted drivers. 
The Prophet (Sm) says: 
Meaning: "Drug are the root of all immoral acts and obscenity." Drug addiction is 
the main instrument that can destroy the youth-power who are the hopes and 
aspirations and the valuable asset of the country. 
116 Islamic Studies
Financial: Drug addition brings about a serious waste of money. A drug addict needs 
a lot of money everyday. This unnecessary expenditure brings endless sufferings for 
the family and society. A drug addict is compelled to spend money on drugs. He 
makes social life miserable by spending money from his family-members as well as 
from the people in society. He creates panic, terror and disorder everywhere. 
Remedies: 
(1) Strict rules should be formulated for the remedy and prevention of drug 
addiction. Of course, there are strict laws in Islam in this respect. (2) It can be 
prevented strictly imposing anti-drug laws. (3) Its remedy is possible if people are 
made aware of and follow the Islamic rules and regulations. (4) Those who are 
directly involved in the preparation, circulation and supply of drugs, should refrain 
from doing this heinous work for the interest of the nation. (5) It should be the duty of 
the parents to acquaint their children with the harmful effect of drugs, make them 
careful about selecting friends and keep them away from dishonest companions. It is 
also their duty to be close to each other through love and affection and to keep the 
family ties firm. (6) Teachers can try to dissuade their students from taking drug by 
giving orders and advice and also by their own behaviour and character. (7) The 
Imams of the mosques and the Alim community can explain its demerits by religious 
preaching and advice. (8) Social leaders and volunteers can greatly contribute to 
preventing this disease. (9) The Government can prevent it by passing laws, enforcing 
them strictly and giving examplary punishment. (10) The law enforcement agencies 
should be more active in this respect. All sources of its production, supply and 
expansion of drugs should strictly be stopped. 
From this lesson we have learnt: 
1) The harmful effects of smoking 
2) The remedy for smoking 
3) Introduction to drug addiction 
4) Disastrous effect of drug addiction 
5) Remedial measures for drug addiction 
We must keep ourselves and society free from this bad habit. We must promise to 
make our life sound and healthy. 
Islamic Studies 117
Exercise 
Multiple Choice Questions 
1. What is said to be more heinous than murder in the Holy Qur'an? 
a. telling lies b. misappropriation of Amanat 
c. doing Geebat d. creating dispute 
2. According to the Qur'an and the Hadith if someone earns is his livelihood by 
Haram incomea. 
people of the society do not honour him 
b. his mental power is decreased 
c. his children do not become ideal men 
d. his Ibadat is not acceptable 
3. According to Islamic Shariya, to speak about any friend's falsehood in his/ her 
absence is calleda. 
slander b. falsehood 
c. geebat d. fitna 
4. An officer takes bribe. He spends the whole of it in another sector for good work. 
For this activity, he willa. 
get sowab because he spends money for good work 
b. get less sowab because the money is earned through bribe 
c. be sinner because the money is earned through bribe 
d. get neither sowab nor commit any sin because sins will be driven away for 
using the money for good work 
Answer the questions no. 5 and 6 in the light of the following passage. Suppose, one 
of your Muslim neighbours is addicted to heroin. When he was questioned about it, he 
said with firmness, "No where in the Qur'an and the Hadith it is mentioned that heroin 
is prohibited". When an expert Alim was asked about it, he replied, "Surely heroin is 
Haram in Islam." 
5. What could be the consequence of the person who takes heroin? 
i. It diminishes the conscience 
ii. It increases physical strength 
iii. Is hated by the society 
Which of the following answers is correct? 
a. i b. i & ii 
c. i & iii d. ii & iii 
118 Islamic Studies
6. The expert Alim declared that taking heroin Haram, because heroina. 
creates intoxication b. creates 1oss of appetite for food 
c. makes one mentally disturbed d. produces excitement in the blood 
Answer the questions no. 7 and 8 in the light of following Hadith- 
The prophet (Sm) said, "Those who spend sleepless nights keeping watch at the 
border to defend their country, will be placed into Jannat." 
7 . The inner meaning of this Hadith isa. 
Patriotism b. sincerity 
c. devotion to duties d. truthfu1ness 
8. Those who keep watch at the border are given more importance in Islam, because they - 
i. ensures security to lives and wealth 
ii. spend sleepless nights 
iii. perform responsibilities as patriots 
Which of the following answers is correct? 
a. i b. ii 
c. i & iii d. ii & iii 
9. For attaining Taqwa , you willi. 
say more Nafal Salat with Farz 
ii avoid Haram and accept Halal 
iii. think of Haqqullah and Haqqul Ibad 
Which of the following answers is correct? 
a. i b. ii 
c. i & ii d. i , ii & iii 
10. In Islam, purity meansi. 
keeping dress and clothing neat and holy 
ii. keeping all parts of the body neat and holy 
iii. keeping the mind clean and pure 
Which of the following answers is correct? 
a. i b. i & ii 
c. ii & iii d. i, ii & iii 
Answer the questions no. 11 and 12 in the light of the following passage. 
Mr . Rahim kept taka 10 thousand to Mr. Karim as Amanat. Mr. Karim used that 
Islamic Studies 119
money for his business. One day when Mr.Rahim asked for the money, Mr. Karim 
failed to give back the money at once. After three months, Mr. Karim gave back 
the money with some profit. 
11. In this circumstances, Mr. Karima. 
can use the money with the condition of giving it back whenever the owner 
will ask for it. 
b. can use the money in business 
c. will reserve the money for giving it back at once whenever the owner will 
ask for 
d. will give back the total money after certain period with some profit 
12. According to Islamic Shariya, in the hand of Mr. Karimi. 
Amanat is saved 
ii. Amanat is misappropriated 
iii. Amanat is saved with some profit 
Which of the following answers is correct? 
a. i b. ii 
c. i & ii d. ii & iii 
Creative Questions 
1. Two friends, Salam and Zakir started a shop of sweetmeat as partners. There is 
high demand of their sweets in the market. Salam planned to mix low priced colour of 
cloths and chemicals with the sweets and will sell in the market. Zakir did not agree to 
the plan of Salam. He said, It is one kind of cheating. The Prophet (Sm) said about 
cheating, " The person who cheat does not belong to our community." Zakir again 
said, "If you do not avoid this plan, I'll not continue business with you ." 
a. What is cheating ? 
b. Explain a demerit cheating. 
c. Why is it not legal to mix colour of cloths and chemicals with sweets in 
Islam? Explain. 
d. The Prophet (Sm) said, "The person who cheat does not belong to our 
community." -Analyse. 
120 Islamic Studies
Forma-16, Islamic Studies-9 
2. Asif stood first in the examination. Faisal became envious of it and started 
spreading scandal against Asif. Asif knew the matter from others. When he asked 
Faisal about it, he became excited and started quarreling. When the teacher knew 
about the matter, he called Faisal and said," You are doing Geebat. Geebat creates 
malice-envy, quarrel and dispute in the society; that causes harm to the individual, 
family and society." 
a. What is malice -envy? 
b. What is Geebat? Explain in short. 
c. How could Faisal keep himself away from Geebat ? 
d. "From Geebat, malice-envy, quarrel and dispute are created in the society" 
Analyse. 
3. Habiba invited her friends to her house. According to promise, all friends came 
except Nahar. After some days when Habiba met Nahar, she (Habiba) avoided Nahar. 
It hurt Nahar. Nahar went forward and wanted to talk to Habiba. But Habiba said, I 
am not in speaking term with the person who breaks promise. Nahar became angry 
with this. Then Habiba said, You should bear in mind, that in the Hadith "To a Mumin, 
a promise is like a debt." 
a. Sign of what is breaking promise? 
b. What do you understand by keeping promise? Explain in your own word. 
c. How can Habiba influence her friend for keeping promise? 
d. "To a Mumin, a promise is like a debt" Explain the significance of statement. 
Islamic Studies 121