

Chapter - 2 
Sources of Shariat 
Introduction 
Islam is a complete and permanent code of life. Allah is its formulator and Hazrat 
Muhammad (Sm) its last propagator. Allah and Allah's Prophet (Sm) have imposed the 
rules and regulations of Islam for the welfare of mankind. These rules and regulations 
are called 'Shariat'. Declaring the completeness of this 'Shariat', Allah says: 
Meaning: "Today I have made your religion complete for you and have completed 
my grace to you. I have selected the Islamic code of life for you" (Sura Maida: 3) 
The rules and regulations of Shariat are indivisible, and the Shariat of Islam is a 
complete whole. It is prohibited to accept some parts of it and to reject some other 
parts. It is compulsory to have belief (Iman) in every command of 'Shariat' and to 
comply wholly with it. To oppose or to violate any rule of 'Shariat' is at the same time 
to face two dangerous consequences. One is to be faced here and the other hereafter. 
Allah Ta'la says in this regard: "Then, do you believe some parts of the holy book 
(Kitab) and reject the other parts? Hence, those of you who do the same will face 
the consequences of shame and disgrace in the worldly life, and on the day of 
judgement, they will be thrown towards severest punishment." (Sura Baqara: 85) 
It is clear from the above Ayat (part of Sura) that the punishment for acceptance of 
some parts of Shariat and the rejection of some others is severe both in this world and 
in the Akhirat. 
Sources of Shariat are four: (a) Al-Kitab (Qur'anul Mazid), (b) Sunnah, (c) Ijma and 
(d) Qiyas. 
The Holy Qur'an, the first source 
The first and the main source of Shariat is the Holy Qur'an. It is a clear document of 
Shariat. The main structure of Shariat is based on it. Sunnah holds the second place 
as the source of Shariat because the Holy Qur'an is the basis and Sunnah its 
explanations. There are brief descriptions of all subjects in the Holy Qur'an. And the 
Hadith consists of the analysis of those subjects. Allah says about the Holy Qur'an:
Meaning: "I have revealed the Kitab to you, which is the vivid interpretations of all 
subjects" (Sura An Nahal: 89) 
Sunnah, the second source 
Sunnah is the second source of Shariat. It was the responsibility of the great 
Prophet (Sm) to give explanations of all the brief matters given in the Holy Qur'an. 
Allah says in this regard: 
Meaning: "And I have revealed the Holy Qur'an to you so that you can explain 
these issues to the people on whom these are bestowed and so that they may think 
about them." (Sura An -Nahal : 44). The explanations of the great Prophet (Sm) are 
called the Hadith. Allah, the Holiest, has mentioned clearly in the following Ayat (the 
part of Sura) that the Hadith of the Prophet (Sm) is the source of Shariat: 
Meaning: "Try to hold firmly onto what the Prophet (Sm) has given you and 
discard those which he has forbidden." (Sura Al-Hashar: 7) 
Ijma, the third source 
The third source of Shariat is 'Ijma' or the consensus of the Ummat (followers). 
Allah has given such status to the Ummat of Hazrat Muhammad (Sm) that it is a great 
sin to oppose the consensus of the Ummat. 
Allah, the Merciful says in this regard: "Anybody who opposes the Prophet and 
speaks against the path followed by the pious people even after the right direction is 
shown to him, shall be directed to the same direction which he has followed and 
thrown into jahannam (hell). And that is the worst destination" (Sura An-Nisa: 
115). Stressing the Ijma of his Ummat Allah's prophet (Sm) said: 
Meaning: "The things which the Muslims accept as good are also good to 
Allah."(Kitabus Sunnah) 
Qiyas, the fourth source 
The fourth source of Shariat is Qiyas. New issues will arise in the human society 
everyday. If the solutions to these issues are found neither in the Holy Qur'an nor in 
Sunnah nor in Ijma, these are to be solved in the light of Qiyas. The Hadith related by 
Hazrat Muaz Ibn Jabal (R) is noteworthy in this regard. Allah's Prophet (Sm) asked: 
Islamic Studies 21
"What will you do if you don't find the solution to any issue in Allah's Kitab?" 
"Then I will follow the Sunnah of the Prophet." replied Hazrat Muaz (R). Then the 
Prophet (Sm) again asked: "If you still don't find it even in that?" Hazrat Muaz (R) 
replied: "Then I will apply my own conscience and intelligence to take decisions. 
Then Allah's Prophet (Sm) said: "All praises be to Allah who has made the 
messenger of Allah's Prophet(Sm) reply in such a way as Allah's Prophet (Sm) has 
been pleased." (Ahmad, Abu Dawood, Tirmizi) 
The Qur'an Majid 
Introduction 
The Holy Qur'an contains the messages of Allah. It is the last and the best of all 
the heavenly books which have been revealed by Allah for the correction of all 
mankind. It is revealed in the Arabic language because Arabic was the language of the 
great Prophet (Sm) and his nation. Allah says in this regard: 
Meaning: "I have sent every prophet as the speaker of the language of his own 
nation, so that he can clearly interpret to them." (Sura Ibra'him: 4) 
The language of the Qur'an is easy and simple. There is neither any complexity nor 
any obscurity in it. Allah says in this regard: 
Meaning: "I have surely made the Holy Qur'an simple in your language, so that 
they can receive your advice." (Sura Ad-Dukhan: 58) 
Allah further says: 
Meaning: "I have surely revealed the Holy Qur'an in the Arabic language, so that 
you may understand it easily" (Sura Yousuf: 2) 
The meaning of Qur'an is 'read'. It is called the Qur'an because it is the most 
widely read religious book in the world. According to another opinion, the word 
Qur'an originates from the verb root 'Qaru-n' which means 'to assemble' or 'to collect'. 
The Holy Qur'an is the summary of all the previous heavenly books and all the 
knowledge and science of the world has been assimilated in it. That is why, it is called 
the Holy Qur'an. And for this reason, it is also called Al-Hakim, the storehouse of 
knowledge. The Holy Qur'an has a lot of titles. Such as: 
22 Islamic Studies
1) Al-Furqan which differentiates between truth and falsehood. 
2) Al-Kitab the book 
3) Az-Zikr the advice 
4) At-Tanzil which is revealed 
5) An-Noor the light. 
The Revelation 
The Holy Qur'an was revealed to the great Prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm). It 
was written in Lauhe-Mahfuz (a well protected plate). Allah says in the Holy Qur'an 
in this regard: 
Meaning: "Rather it is the Holy Qur'an which has been preserved in Lauhe 
Mahfuz (a well-protected place)." 
On the night of Qadr, the entire Qur'an was revealed at a time from 'Lauhe 
Mahfuz' in a place named 'Baitul Izzah', at the nearest sky from the earth. Afterwards, 
the initial five Ayats (verses) of Sura 'Alaq' were revealed to the great Prophet Hazrat 
Muhammad (Sm) through the angel, Jibrail (A) in the month of Ramadan. He was 
then in meditation in the cave of Hera and so the revelation of the Qur'an remained 
postponed for many days. Then the Holy Qur'an started to be revealed in parts 
sometimes five Ayats, sometimes ten Ayats, sometimes part of one Ayat and 
sometimes one complete Sura were revealed. Thus the revelation of the Holy Qur'an 
took place throughout the twenty three years of the prophethood of the great Prophet 
(Sm). The revelation took place in the context of different circumstances, necessities 
and occasions. In this regard, Allah says in the Holy Qur'an: 
Meaning: "And I have revealed this Holy Qur'an in small parts, so that you can 
read them out to the people gradually and I have revealed it appropriately." (Sura 
Bani Israil: 106) 
It is further said in the Holy Qur'an: "The Kafirs (disbelievers) say, why wasn't the 
entire Qur'an revealed to this man at a time? Yes, this is done so, because this may 
be well imprinted in your head and heart. And this is why I've arranged it well in 
separate parts and in a special manner" (Sura Al-Furqan: 32) 
Islamic Studies 23
Preservation 
Very few of the Arabs knew how to read and write. There was also scarcity of 
writing materials. But they had good memory. Nabi Karim (Sm) used to memorize the 
parts of the Holy Qur'an immediately after these were revealed to him. He even used 
to try to memorize them by moving his two lips with Jibrail (A) at the time of the 
revelation. 
In this regard, Allah says: "You do not recite the revelation rapidly in order to 
memorize it soon. The matter of its preservation and reading is My responsibility." 
(Sura Qiama: 15,16) He used to recite the Holy Qur'an night and day. He also used to 
direct the Sahabis (his followers) to memorize the Qur'an. They used to memorize the 
Holy Qur'an by themselves and made their family members memorize the same with 
care. The humming sound of the recitation could be heard from their houses at dead of 
night. Nabi Karim (Sm) used to go near the house of the Sahabis in the dark of night 
and listen to their recitation. He used to send the Sahabis to the farthest areas with a 
view to teaching the Holy Qur'an. He sent Musa'b Ibn Umar (R) and Abdullah Ibn 
Umme Maktum (R) to Madinah to teach the Holy Qur'an. 
Apart from memorizing the Holy Qur'an, it was systematically written during the 
period of Prophet Muhammad (Sm). A team of distinguished followers were engaged 
as the writers of the revelation. Of them, Zaid Ibn Sabit (R), Ubai Ibn Ka'ab (R), 
Muaz Ibn Jabal (R), Muabia (R), Abu Bakr (R), Umar Farooq (R), Usman (R) and Ali 
(R) were noteworthy. 
Writing materials were scarce during that period. Printing machine was not 
invented then. So, the Sahabis preserved the Ayats of the Holy Qur'an by writing them 
on the branches of date trees, pieces of stones, skins, tree-leaves, papers or pieces of 
clothes, etc. 
Compilation 
The entire Qur'an was written during the life time of the Prophet (Sm) under his 
direct supervision. But it was all scattered then. During the period of the first Caliph 
Hazrat Abu Bakr (R) on the 12th Hijri, a bloody Jiha'd took place in a place named 
Yamama. Seventy Hafiz-e-Qur'an were martyred in this Jiha'd. Hazrat Umar (R) 
worried at this. He said to Caliph Abu Bakr (R): "There is a risk of losing the major 
part of the Holy Qur'an if the Hafiz-e-Qur'an are martyred in different Jiha'ds in this 
way. So, please arrange for the compilation of the Qur'an Majid." In reply, Abu Bakr 
(R) asked Hazrat Umar (R): "Umar how can you do such work that the holy Prophet 
(Sm) of Allah did not do?" Then Umar (R) replied: "By Allah, there is good in it" At 
last, Abu Bakr (R) gave this great responsibility to Zaid Ibn Sabit (R), the writer of the 
Ohee (message revelation). He wrote the Holy Qur'an on paper in the form of a book 
24 Islamic Studies
Forma-4, Islamic Studies-9 
from different manuscripts written during the life of time of the holy Prophet (Sm). It 
took about one year. This book was kept under the supervision of Abu Bakr (R). After 
his death the book was in the care of Hazrat Umar (R). After his Shahadat 
(martyrdom), according to his will, the copy of the Qur'an was kept with his daughter 
Bibi Hafsa (R), the wife of the holy Prophet (Sm). 
The Islamic empire was largely extended during the period of the third Caliph 
Hazrat Usman (R). Different nations and speakers of different languages embraced 
Islam in groups because of the spread of Islam. Many of them could not pronounce 
certain words of the Qur'an in accordance with the reading method of the Quraish. 
Moreover, the followers of one reading method regarded the followers of other 
reading methods as wrong readers. Especially Huzaifa (R), a distinguished follower 
(Sahabi), saw the difference in the reading style of the Holy Qur'an among the 
Muslims who informed the third Caliph Hazrat Usman (R) of the matter. The Caliph 
immediately discussed the matter with the leading Sahabis and formed a board of four 
distinguished Sahabis to prepare a documentary edition of the Qur'an. These four 
Sahabis were Zaid-Ibn-Sabit (R), Abdullah Ibn Zubair (R), Sayeed Ibn Aas (R) and 
Abdur Rahman -Ibn-Haris (R). 
This initiative of Hazrat Usman (R) was taken in Hijri 24. This board prepared 
seven true copies of the Qur'an from the copy preserved with Bibi Hafsa (R). Each of 
the copiers was a Hafiz-e-Qur'an. While preparing the copies, they used to listen to the 
recitation of different Hafizes. For this reason, the entire Muslim world accepted these 
copies as unfaulty. The original copy was returned to Hazrat Hafsa (R). One of the 
prepared copies was preserved in the centre with the Caliph and the rest of the copies 
were sent to different administrative centres, so that there could be no anomaly in the 
recitation of the Holy Qur'an. Afterwards, the copies preserved in the scattered way 
were collected from all and destroyed. Thus, the Holy Qur'an was collected under the 
direct supervision of the third Caliph of Islam Hazrat Usman (R). For this noble deed 
of the Caliph, he is called 'Jamiul Qur'an or the compiler of the Qur'an. 
This compilation of the Qur'an did not bring any change in the order (serial) of 
Ayats and Suras done by the great Prophet (Sm) as per the instruction of Allah. That is 
because maintaining the order (serial) of the Ayats is Wajib. 
When Hazrat Jibrail (A) brought any part of the Qur'an to the Prophet (Sm), he told 
the Prophet (Sm) in which place of a Sura the part should be incorporated. Then the 
Prophet (Sm) called upon and directed the Sahabis (the followers) who used to write the 
messages to incorporate the revealed part in the proper place of the Sura. In the same 
Islamic Studies 25
way, the order (serial) of the Suras were also decided by Allah. At present the Suras of 
the Holy Qur'an are arranged in the same order as they are preserved in Lauhe Mahfuz. 
There were no 'Harkats' or symbols of voice in the Holy Qur'an at that time. As a 
result, the non-Arabian Muslims later faced difficulties in reciting the Holy Qur'an. 
Then Hajjaj-Ibn-Yousuf, the Iraqi ruler of the Umayyads arranged for the addition of 
'Harkats' to the Qur'an and solved this problem. 
Makki-Madani Sura 
The Holy Qur'an is divided into thirty paras (parts). There are 114 Suras and 6236 
Ayats in it. But in another view, there are 6666 Ayats in the Holy Qur'an. In the context 
of their revelation, these Suras were divided into two parts: Makki and Madani. 
The famous opinion about the fixation of Makki and Madani Sura is as follows: 
The Suras which were revealed before the Hijrat are called the Makki Suras and 
the Suras which were revealed after the Hijrat are called the Madani Suras. In this 
regard, Yahya-Ibn-Salam said: "The Suras which were revealed during the Hijrat of 
the great Prophet (Sm) till the time of his arrival at Madina are also called the Makki 
Suras. The Suras which were revealed after his arrival at Madina and during the 
period of his stay outside Madina are called the Madani Suras." 
The number of Suras revealed in Makka is 86 and in Madina 28. 
Features of the Makki Suras: 
1. The call to Tauhid, iba'dat and Risalat in the Makki Suras is performed. 
2. The resurrection after death, accounts of the deeds of the worldly life, the danger 
of Qiamat, the serene peace in Jannat and the descriptions of the severe 
punishment in Jahannam (hell) have been emphasized in them. 
3. They contain the general principles of Shariat and the descriptions of good 
character and its characteristics. 
4. They narrate the stories of bloody killings of the Mushriks, misappropriation of 
wealth of the orphans, burial of the alive female children and their various bad 
practices and ill behaviours. 
5. They narrate the facts of the previous prophets and the stories of the miserable 
consequences of their disobedient Ummat. 
6. The Makki Suras are short but grave and significant. Their powerful words vibrates 
in the ear and throbs in the heart. 
7. They emphasize the importance of the contents which is presented through the 
swearing of the famous objects. 
26 Islamic Studies
Feature of the Madani Suras: 
1. Solutions to different problems of iba'dat, social behaviours, customs, mutual 
transactions, halal and haram, the law of inheritence, rewards of Jiha'd (religious 
war), trade and commerce, foreign policy, judicial system, criminal procedure 
code, personal, familial, socio-economic, political and community life are 
mentioned in them. 
2. The Madani Suras especially deal with inviting the Ahle-Kitab, i.e. the Jews and 
the Christians, to embrace Islam. 
3. Description of the disinterest of the Ahle-Kitab towards truth and their distortion 
of the Kitabs are given in these Suras. 
4. The hypocrisy of the Munafiqs (hypocrites) and their conspiracy against Islam 
have been unveiled. 
5. The Madani Ayats and Suras are lengthy. The objectives and aims of Shariat have 
been clearly focused in them. 
Tilawat-e-Nazira 
To recite the Holy Qur'an by seeing is called Tilawat-e-Nazira. It is better and 
more rewarding to recite by seeing. To learn how to recite the Holy Qur'an, one is 
required to read at first by seeing it and by correctly pronouncing every letter. Allah's 
grace (Rahmat) comes down to the house where the Holy Qur'an is recited. The 
honour and dignity of the persons who face hindrance and difficulty in reciting the 
Holy Qur'an, will be blessed and rewarded doubly by Allah, the Merciful, as our 
beloved Prophet (Sm) has mentioned. According to the great Prophet (Sm), the heart 
(of a person) is just like an empty room, in which there is not even a single Ayat of the 
Holy Qur'an. Therefore, we will always see and recite the Holy Qur'an correctly. 
Importance and good consequences (Fazilat) of reciting the Holy Qur'an 
The word 'Tilawat' means 'to read', 'to follow', 'to realize', etc. Allah has revealed the 
Holy Qur'an to guide mankind to the right and honest path. The Qur'an has presented 
to human beings a clear description of truth and falsehood, good and bad, heaven and 
hell and the life here and hereafter. It is a means of salvation for mankind. It is a 
preserver and bearer of the welfare of the humanity of the world. It was the prime 
responsibility during the prophethood of the great Prophet (Sm) to make others listen 
to the recitation of the Holy Qur'an. The Qur'an is the store-house of all kinds of 
knowledge and science. There is no subject on which information has not been 
presented in the Qur'an. A French scholar has rightly remarked: "The Holy Qur'an is 
an institution of science for the scientists, a dictionary for the linguists, a book of 
Islamic Studies 27
grammar for the grammarians and an encyclopedia of laws". The meaning of the Holy 
Qur'an has to be understood for clear realization of these things. One has to think and 
carry out research on the subjects presented here. And one has to devote oneself to 
reading it with an open heart. About those who do not recite the Holy Qur'an 
accordingly, Allah says: 
Meaning: "Don't they think deeply about the Holy Qur'an? Or are their hearts 
locked?" (Sura Muhammad: 24) 
The real objectives of the revelation of the Holy Qur'an will only be achieved 
when we recite it with understanding. Allah says in this regard: "This is a Kitab (holy 
book) which is full of welfare and which I have revealed to you, so that human 
beings can realise its Ayats and the wise men take advice" (Sura Saad: 29) 
To recite the Holy Qur'an with 'Tajbeed' is essential. To recite every letter of the 
Holy Qur'an according to its pronunciation with sifat (the special position of 
pronunciation of letters) is called Tajbeed. It is a sin to recite the Holy Qur'an with 
errors. Rasulullah (Sm) has directed us to recite the Holy Qur'an with tajbeed and 
intonation. He says: 
Meaning: "The person who does not recite the Holy Qur'an with melodious voice is 
not established on my principles (Abu Dawood)." Allah Rabbul A'lameen (the Lord 
of the Universe) listens to the recitation of a melodious voice. 
The Fazilat (good effects) of reciting the Holy Qur'an is enormous. Nabi Karim 
(Sm) says in this regard: 
Meaning: "The person who recites a single letter of the Kitab of Allah, gets Allah's 
grace and the quantity of this grace is ten times greater." (Tirmizi) 
He further said: "The house wherein the Qur'an is recited looks as bright to 
the dwellers of the heaven as the stars look to the inhabitants of the earth" 
(Baihaqi). He further said: "Make your own houses bright with salat and recitation 
of the Holy Qur'an". (Baihaqi) 
The recitation of the Holy Qur'an is the best of all kinds of iba'dat (prayer). 
Allah's Prophet (Sm) says in this regard: 
28 Islamic Studies
"For my Ummat the most rewardable iba'dat is the recitation of the Holy Qur'an." 
(Baihaqi) 
The success of a nation depends on the recitation of the Holy Qur'an. This success 
will come when we recite the Qur'an with understanding and implement the 
instructions of it in the society. The parents of those who will work according to the 
instructions of the Holy Qur'an after studying it, will wear such a crown on the day of 
judgement (Qiamat) that its light will even be brighter than the sunlight. And that 
person's position will be heightened so much that we cannot even imagine it now. 
We will always recite the Holy Qur'an with care, try to understand it and act 
accordingly. 
Shane-Nuzul (the background) 
'Shan' means position, reason, incident, context etc. and 'Nuzul' means revelation. 
The Ayats and Suras of the Holy Qur'an were revealed in the context of certain 
incidents and situations. An incident or situation centring which an Ayat or a Sura was 
revealed is called the 'Shane-Nuzul' of that Ayat or Sura. 
Usefulness of knowing the Shane-Nuzul: 
1. We can know the mystery of promulgating the rules of Shariat. 
2. We can understand the right meaning of the Ayats and resolve the complexity of 
the meanings- 
Islamic Studies 29
Sura Ad-Duha 
(Revealed in Makkah: No. of Ayats: 11) 
Shane-Nuzul 
It is described in the Hadith that the holy Prophet (Sm) once could not perform 
Salatut Tahajjud for three consecutive nights as he was sick. Jibrail (A) also did not 
come to him with Ohee (message) during that period. Then the Mushriks started 
saying: "Allah has deserted Muhammad (Sm) and is displeased with him". Also 
Umme Jamil, the wife of Abu Lahab, came and said to Nabi Karim (Sm), "O 
Muhammad, I think your devil has deserted you. I have not seen him coming to you 
for two or three nights." Then Allah Ta'ala revealed this Sura. 
Word Meaning 
30 Islamic Studies 
forenoon the first part of 
the day 
and 
Night 
situaltion 
When 
he has not deserted 
and is not displeased 
must 
orphan, in a shelterless 
he has given shelter of ever 
has received 
the protector 
you 
one who lost the way 
has shown the way 
period is 
the best 
for you 
first the worldly life 
very soon 
will reward you 
you will be Pleased 
did he not find you? 
Poor 
made rich 
do not be rude 
Person who prays 
do not threat 
contribution, riches 
wealth 
describe express 
gratitude 
Sura Ad-Duha 
(Revealed in Makkah: No. of Ayats: 11) 
Shane-Nuzul 
It is described in the Hadith that the holy Prophet (Sm) once could not perform 
Salatut Tahajjud for three consecutive nights as he was sick. Jibrail (A) also did not 
come to him with Ohee (message) during that period. Then the Mushriks started 
saying: "Allah has deserted Muhammad (Sm) and is displeased with him". Also 
Umme Jamil, the wife of Abu Lahab, came and said to Nabi Karim (Sm), "O 
Muhammad, I think your devil has deserted you. I have not seen him coming to you 
for two or three nights." Then Allah Ta'ala revealed this Sura. 
Word Meaning 
30 Islamic Studies 
forenoon the first part of 
the day 
and 
Night 
situaltion 
When 
he has not deserted 
and is not displeased 
must 
orphan, in a shelterless 
he has given shelter of ever 
has received 
the protector 
you 
one who lost the way 
has shown the way 
period is 
the best 
for you 
first the worldly life 
very soon 
will reward you 
you will be Pleased 
did he not find you? 
Poor 
made rich 
do not be rude 
Person who prays 
do not threat 
contribution, riches 
wealth 
describe express 
gratitude
Sura Ad-Duha 
(Revealed in Makkah: No. of Ayats: 11) 
Shane-Nuzul 
It is described in the Hadith that the holy Prophet (Sm) once could not perform 
Salatut Tahajjud for three consecutive nights as he was sick. Jibrail (A) also did not 
come to him with Ohee (message) during that period. Then the Mushriks started 
saying: "Allah has deserted Muhammad (Sm) and is displeased with him". Also 
Umme Jamil, the wife of Abu Lahab, came and said to Nabi Karim (Sm), "O 
Muhammad, I think your devil has deserted you. I have not seen him coming to you 
for two or three nights." Then Allah Ta'ala revealed this Sura. 
Word Meaning 
30 Islamic Studies 
forenoon the first part of 
the day 
and 
Night 
situaltion 
When 
he has not deserted 
and is not displeased 
must 
orphan, in a shelterless 
he has given shelter of ever 
has received 
the protector 
you 
one who lost the way 
has shown the way 
period is 
the best 
for you 
first the worldly life 
very soon 
will reward you 
you will be Pleased 
did he not find you? 
Poor 
made rich 
do not be rude 
Person who prays 
do not threat 
contribution, riches 
wealth 
describe express 
gratitude 
Translation 
In the name of Allah, the most 
Beneficient, most Merciful. 
1. By the forenoon of the of . 
2. And the night when it is quiet. 
3. Your Protector has not deserted 
you nor is He displeased with 
you. 
4. And surely the letter period is 
better for you than the former. 
5. And soon your protector will 
grace you and you will be 
pleased. 
6. Didn't He (Allah) find you an 
orphan and then give you 
another? 
7. And He (Allah) found you 
uninformed about the path, so He 
showed the way. 
8. And He (Allah) found you helpless, 
so, He (Allah) made you free from 
wants. 
9. So, do not be rude to the orphans. 
10. And do not threat anybody who 
asks. 
11. And show your gratitude to your 
Creator by expressing His 
(Allah's) Niamats. 
Teachings 
Allah, the Merciful, used to shower Allah's grace ceaselessly on the prophets 
(Nabi-Rasuls) since their birth. Our Prophet Nabi Karim (Sm) was an orphan, and 
Allah arranged everything for rearing him up well. He was in search of truth, and 
Allah showed him the way. He was poor, and Allah made him well-to-do. In this sura, 
after mentioning all the grace of Allah, Allah ordered him not to be rude to the 
orphans and not to threaten the beggars but to express the Niamat (grace) of Allah. 
Islamic Studies 31
Sura Ad-Duha 
(Revealed in Makkah: No. of Ayats: 11) 
Shane-Nuzul 
It is described in the Hadith that the holy Prophet (Sm) once could not perform 
Salatut Tahajjud for three consecutive nights as he was sick. Jibrail (A) also did not 
come to him with Ohee (message) during that period. Then the Mushriks started 
saying: "Allah has deserted Muhammad (Sm) and is displeased with him". Also 
Umme Jamil, the wife of Abu Lahab, came and said to Nabi Karim (Sm), "O 
Muhammad, I think your devil has deserted you. I have not seen him coming to you 
for two or three nights." Then Allah Ta'ala revealed this Sura. 
Word Meaning 
30 Islamic Studies 
forenoon the first part of 
the day 
and 
Night 
situaltion 
When 
he has not deserted 
and is not displeased 
must 
orphan, in a shelterless 
he has given shelter of ever 
has received 
the protector 
you 
one who lost the way 
has shown the way 
period is 
the best 
for you 
first the worldly life 
very soon 
will reward you 
you will be Pleased 
did he not find you? 
Poor 
made rich 
do not be rude 
Person who prays 
do not threat 
contribution, riches 
wealth 
describe express 
gratitude 
This Sura teaches us 
1. Allah never deserts His beloved people. However grave their danger may be, he 
will put an end to it . 
2. When Allah bestows wealth, prestige and honour on any person, he/she has to 
come forward in relieving the pains of the poor and the distressed. 
3. Instead of rebuking the beggars, we have to help them as much as possible. This 
is because Allah has earmarked the share of the beggars and the distressed in the 
wealth of the rich. The distance between the wealthy and the poor can be reduced 
by Zakat, Sadqa, gifts, alms, etc. 
4. Wealth is the Niamat (gift) of Allah. Whenever Allah pleases anybody with gifts, 
he has to acknowledge his gratitude without being miserly. 
5. Knowledge and science is a great gift of Allah. The duty of those who have made 
themselves successful by acquiring knowledge and also who have been able to 
enlighten themselves with the light of education, is to release others from the 
curse of ignorance. Illiteracy and ignorance is the curse of a nation. It is the 
prime duty of every literate and wise person in society to come forward to 
eradicate this ignorance and illiteracy from the society. 
Sura-Al-Inshirah 
(Revealed in Makka: No. of Ayats: 8) 
Shane-Nuzul (the background) 
The people of Makka used to respect Hazrat Muhammad (Sm) before he gained 
Nubuyat (prophethood). They used to call him Al-Amin (the faithful) and listen to him 
with respect. But after he started preaching Islam, the people of Makka began to tease 
and laugh at him. The Kafirs and Mushriks (the disbelievers) of Makka turned into his 
enemies. They continued to tease him thinking him to be helpless and troubled him 
and his Sahabis (followers) in many ways. The great Prophet (Sm) became worried 
and pessimistic because of their oppression and torture. Under these circumstances, 
Allah revealed this Sura to console Allah's Prophet (Sm). 
32 Islamic Studies
Forma-5, Islamic Studies-9 
Word-Meaning: 
Translation 
In the name of Allah, the most 
Beneficient, most Merciful. 
1. Hazrat, I expanded your chest your 
betterment. 
2. And removed your burden from 
you. 
3. Which was very painful for you? 
4. And I've given high esteem to your 
fame. 
5. Certainly there is ease with pain. 
6. Of course, ease is with pain. 
7. So, whenever you are free devote 
yourself to iba'dat, 
8. And pay your attention to your 
Creator. 
Islamic Studies 33 
I have't expanded or 
opened 
for you 
chest 
you 
I've removed 
from you 
burden 
what/that 
(has) broken frought 
your back 
have the heightened up 
your fame, your mention 
certainly 
trouble, danger 
ease, pace 
you are free from anxiety 
work hard, devote yoursell 
to Ibadat (worship) 
to, at 
put your exclusive 
attention
Teachings 
The great Prophet (Sm) even before attaining the Prophethood used to think that 
the religions of the Kafirs, Mushriks, Christians and Jews were wrong and false. But 
he himself also did not know the right path. For this reason, he was always worried 
and restless. Allah relieved him of this restlessness by bestowing upon him 
Prophethood and broadened his heart. Allah gave him wonderful courage, firm 
attitude, broadness of heart and knowledge and wisdom. 
The injustice and oppression, the activities devoid of principles and the examples of 
being characterless in the Arabian society made him sad with anxiety. But he did not 
know the right way to eradicate these evils from the society. In fact, this anxiety was 
an intolerable burden on his heart. But Allah made him the prophet and showed him 
the bright way to free society from oppressions and evil acts. The Prophet (Sm) with a 
torch of rectification in his hand, gave a clarion call to the Arab nations, who were in 
deep darkness of illiteracy, to the path of the light of hedayet. They did not respond to 
his call easily. They all, excepting a few followers, began to oppose him. But the light 
of Islam reached all around within a short time. 
There was no tribe in Arabia where the holy name of the Prophet (Sm) did not reach. 
Then the whole of Arabia with all their might became his enemy and opposed him. 
The holy Prophet (Sm) and his followers were fed up with their continuous 
suppression and oppression. Then consoling the holy Prophet (Sm) Allah said"This 
hard and difficult situation will not last long, rather it will come to an end very 
soon." Giving him a special instruction, Allah said that when he would retire from the 
responsibilities of spreading Islam, training up his followers, bearing the 
responsibilities of the family etc., he should engage himself in the devotion of Allah 
and in spiritual perseverance. 
This sura teaches us 
1. Allah opens up one's heart to receive if one tries sincerely and devotedly to realize 
truth and justice. 
2. The door of knowledge is opened up to one when one tries rightly to acquire 
education and knowledge. 
3. The social indiscipline, frustration, anarchy, sin and viciousness make the 
conscious people sad. They may have to face adverse situation in eradicating 
these unwanted things. But they should not be disheartened because injustice 
does not last long. Truth will undoubtedly prevail. 
4. Every moment of one's life is extremely valuable and the responsibilities and 
duties of this world are also endless. To carry out these responsibilities properly 
is equivalent to worshipping Allah. 
5. The essential duty of a believer is to offer iba'dat to Allah and devote 
himself/herself to Allah's remembrance after the worldly problems and business 
are over. This brings mental peace and develops the soul. 
34 Islamic Studies
Sura - At-Teen 
(Revealed in Makka: No. of Ayats: 8) 
Shane-Nuzul (the background) 
In this Sura, it has been pledged in the names of two very useful trees and fruits 
and two holy places. These two trees are 'Anjir' and 'Zaitun'. The fruits of Anjir trees 
are very delicious. And the fruits of Zaitun are propitious and produce oil. The 'Tur' (a 
mountain) is the place of conversation between Hazrat Musa (A) and Allah. And 
'Baladul Amin' is holy Makka, the birth place of Rasulullah (Sm). And Al-Masjidul 
Haram is situated here where all kinds of bloodshed are prohibited. In this sura, the 
names of these glorious places are mentioned and a call is given to mankind to accept 
Iman (faith) and perform good deeds. 
Human beings are very nicely shaped. So, their activities should be very good too. 
If they are engaged in bad activities, their punishment will be very serious. And those 
who are used to performing good deeds, will receive unlimited rewards. This sura was 
revealed in this context. 
Word -meaning: 
-Anjir or a fruit like the fig 
-Zaitun', a fruit like Olive 
-Tur hills 
-The Senai Mountain. The mountain with fruit trees is 
called simin and saina' 
-Mankind 
Shape, structure 
again 
him 
I've brought him down 
those people/they 
Have faith/believed 
Islamic Studies 35 
unending 
limitless 
what can 
make you a liar 
the day of Qiamat, the 
day of result, code of life, 
religion 
at the bottom
 done good work 
from them 
reward gift in return 
Translation 
In the name of Allah, the most 
Beneficient, Most Merciful. 
1. Pledging in the names of 'Anjir' 
and 'Zaitun'. 
2. Again pledging in the name of 
'Senai mountain' 
3. And pledge in the name of this 
safe city (Makka). 
4. Certainly, I have created man in 
the best shape. 
5. Then I have brought him down to 
the lowest level. 
6. But, for people except those, who 
have faith (Iman) and done good 
deeds great rewards are waiting. 
7. Oh, the ever-great prophet, who 
can make you a liar about this day 
of results (Qiamat)? 
8. Isn't Allah the best of all the 
Judges? 
In this Sura it is pledged in the names of 'Anjir', 'Tur-e-Senai' (mountain of Senai) 
and the secured city of Makka. By 'Teen' and 'Zaitun', Syria and Palestine were 
referred to as these two countries produce these two fruits. Innumerable prophets from 
Hazrat Ibra'him (A) upto Hazrat Isa (A) came to these two regions. Hazrat Musa (A) 
was given the prophethood in the "Tur" hills. And the very foundation of the city of 
Makka was laid down by Hazrat Ibra'him (A) and Ismail (A). 
36 Islamic Studies 
but, except 
the best judge 
the judges
This Sura teaches us: 
1. Allah Ta'ala has created human beings shapely. The human shape is really 
incomparable. 
2. Allah has given knowledge to human beings after creating them shapely. By dint 
of this knowledge, man has been considered the best of all creations and brought 
under control even those stronger than himself. 
3. When a human being uses his/her own body and strength in unjust and sinful 
activities, he /she gradually goes down into such a bottomless level as there is no 
level lower than this. Such incidents are widely seen in human society. Greed, 
lust, desire, jealousy, malice and anger lower human beings to the lowest level. 
They even lose their sense of distinguishing what is good or what is bad. They 
then become worse than four-footed animals. A four-footed animal attacks its 
enemy with its nails, claws and teeth. But, to avenge, human beings commit 
murder and other heinous crimes destroying human habitations within the 
shortest possible time by using deadly weapons. Such cruelty and barbarous acts 
of human beings can not be compared even with the cruelty of ferocious animals. 
4. However, those who are Mumins and virtuous do not reach upto this level. They 
protect their honour given by Allah. Their character is well developed. They are 
respectful to one another and kind hearted. 
5. The results and consequences of the activities of these two classes of human 
beings are not the same. Punishment for those sinning at the lowest level and 
reward for those having good character are inevitable. 
6. Appropriate punishments and just rewards cannot be given in this world. 
Therefore, there is no reason and way to disbelieve in Akhirat, the life hereafter. 
7. Allah, the greatest of all the judges, will arrange severe punishment for the 
offenders and unimaginable reward for the virtuous. 
8. No conscious person can make the great Prophet (Sm) a liar by disregarding the 
trial of Akhirat. This is because Allah, the Gracious, is the greatest of all the 
judges. 
Islamic Studies 37
Sura-Al-Qadr 
(Revealed in Makkah: No. of Ayats: 5) 
Shane-Nuzul (the background) 
The main purpose of the revelation of this sura is to highlight the glory, 
importance and dignity of the Qur'an Majid. 
It is described in the Riwayat of Ibn-Hatim regarding the background of this sura: 
"One day Rasulullah (Sm) discussed the activities of great men of the Bani Israil who 
had passed eighty years in the iba'dat of Allah (worshipping Allah). They did not 
disobey Allah even for a single moment. These four great men were Hazrat Ayyub (A) 
Zakariyya (A), Hizqeel (A) and Eusha-Ibn-Noon (A). Hearing this, the Sahabis 
(followers) were astonished because the previous prophets and their ummats lived long 
and got the opportunity of offering iba'dat to Allah for many years. But the life of the 
holy Prophet (Sm) as well as his ummats was much shorter and so it was not possible 
for them to be equal to their predecessors in worshipping Allah. At the distress of the 
Sahabis, Hazrat Jibrail (A) came to the great Prophet (Sm) instantly and said: "Your 
Ummats have been astonished to hear about the iba'dat of those four people. Allah has 
given you something better than this." Then he recited 'Sura Qadr' to him. 
Word-meaning 
- certainly I 
- I have revealed it 
- night 
- dignity, majesty 
- do you know? 
- Jibrail (Am). It is said in the Hadith that Jibrail (Am) come down to this 
earth with a big group of angels and pray for Allah's grace for men and 
women who are deeply engaged in Allah's Ibadat (worshipping Allah) 
- by order of 
- All 
- incident 
- peace 
38 Islamic Studies 
- what? 
- the best 
- thousand 
- month 
- comes down 
- angels 
- that 
- to, up to 
- rise 
- morning
Translation: 
In the name of Allah the most 
Beneficent, the most Merciful. 
1. I have certainly revealed this (the 
Qur'an), on the night of majesty 
(Qadr). 
2. And to you know how this night of 
Qadr is? 
3. The night of 'Qadr' is better than a 
thousand months. 
4. On this night the angels and the 
'Ruh' (the souls) come down with 
Allah's permission, carrying all His 
instructions. 
5. Peace! It continues till sunrise. 
Teachings: 
Mentioning the fact of the revelation of the Qur'an Majid and the dignity of the 
night in which it was revealed, Allah, the ever gracious, says that the Qur'an was 
revealed on the night of Qadr. And the dignity of 'Sahabe Qadr' is greater than that of 
one thousand months. Jibrail (A) comes down to earth along with other angels 
carrying Allah's orders. Complete peace prevails on this night till sunrise. 
Learnings from this Sura: 
1. The Holy Qur'an is Allah's message, Allah revealed it on Shabe Qadr and the 
meaning of its revelation on this night is that the entire Qur'an was revealed on 
this night at a time. It is known from the Hadith that the entire Qur'an was first 
revealed in the first sky named 'Baitul-Izzah'. Then by the order of Allah it was 
revealed to Nabi Karim (Sm) gradually and according to neccessity in twentythree 
years. 
2. 'Lailatul Qadr', i.e. the night of the revelation of the Qur'an is a glorious and 
significant night. Decisions on all issues are given very scientifically on this very 
night. There is a hint in the Hadith as to which night is Shabe Qadr. The nights of 
the uneven dates of the last ten days of the Ramadan is Shabe Qadr. And 
according to many scholars, this night is the 27th night of the month of Ramadan. 
Islamic Studies 39 
-
3. The 'iba'dat' (Worshipping of Allah) on 'Lailatul Qadr' (the night of Qadr) is better 
than the iba'dat for one thousand months. It is mentioned in the Hadith Sharif 
(the holy Hadith) that all the past sins of a person who remains standing on this 
night for the iba'dat with faith and hope for having good results from Allah will 
be pardoned. 
4. The 'Lailatul Qadr' has acquired much dignity only because the Holy Qur'an was 
revealed on this night. It actually shows the basic glory and dignity belonging to 
the Qur'an Majid. Therefore, the person, the society and the nation that will 
uphold the Qur'an Majid within themselves and will abide by its instructions will 
possess special dignity and honour. 
Sura Zilzal 
(Revealed in Madinah. No. of Ayats: 8) 
Shane-Nuzul 
The terrible earthquake which will take place before the Qiamat (the doomsday) 
and the accounts of worldly activities in the field of Hashar (Judgement) have been 
described in this sura. There will be repeated earth quakes before the destruction of 
the earth and huge pieces of gold, silver and minerals within the earth will come out. 
Seeing this situation, all human beings will be terrified and will ask one another as to 
what had happened to the earth that all its minerals are coming out today. 
The sura was revealed inspiring human beings to live lives of justice and truth 
giving up greed and lust for wealth and riches of this temporal world. 
40 Islamic Studies 
- when 
- will be shaken 
- earth 
- will vomit, bring forth 
- heavy burden 
- his/her 
- has ordered 
- will come out 
- in groups separately 
- their activities 
- the person 
- will work
Forma-6, Islamic Studies-9 
Translation: 
In the name of Allah, the most 
Beneficent, the most Merciful 
1. When the earth will be shaken 
with its shaking 
2. And the earth will bring forth all 
its internal burdens. 
3. And the human beings will start 
saying, "What has happened to 
this earth?" 
4. On that day, the earth will narrate 
its own story 
5. This is because your Protector 
will order it 
6. On that day human beings will 
come out in different groups, 
because they will be shown their 
own deeds 
7. The person who will do the 
slightest good thing will also see 
it himself. 
8. And the person who will do the 
slightest bad thing will also see it 
himself. 
Islamic Studies 41 
- will say/tell 
- what has happened to it? 
- that day 
- will speak 
- news 
- quantity/amount 
- particles, smaller than ants 
- good/better 
- bad, sin 
- will observe that
Teachings 
The world is short-lived. The life time of human beings here is also short. But this 
temporal worldly life is very precious. All the big and small activities of life are being 
recorded. After the destruction of this world, Hazrat Israfil (A) will once again blow 
the horn. Then all the human beings will arise from their respective graves and 
assemble in the field of judgement (Maidan of Hashar). Then everybody will come to 
see all his/her respective small and big activities. 
Learnings from this Sura: 
1. Deeds of life, conversations, movements all should be guided by Shariat. 
2. Physical strength, manpower, financial strength - nothing will come to any use in 
Akhirat (the life hereafter). Wealth and riches - the main root of all sins - will 
be useless in the next world (Akhirat). 
3. In the field of judgement every person will observe the accounts of his/her own 
activities. 
4. Good activities, although very small, should not be neglected and avoided thinking 
them to be tiny. This is because innumerable good activities of this kind taken 
together will appear to be very big good work to Allah. 
5. We should not involve ourselves in any sinful activity thinking it to be insignificant 
because even small sinful activities lead human beings to greater sinful activities. In 
this connection, the holy Prophet (Sm) told Hazrat Aisha (R), "O Aisha, try to keep 
away from those sins which are regarded as small, because Allah will take 
accounts of these also." (Musnad-e-Ahmad) 
Al-Hadith 
'Hadith' means speeches or, in the language of shariat, the messages, activities and 
the silent agreements of the great Prophet (Sm). In the same way, the speeches, 
activities and the silent agreements of the Sahabis (the followers) and the Tabiins are 
called Hadith. Hadith is the second source of Islamic Shariat. In view of the above 
definition, Hadith can be divided into three parts: 
a. Qawli 
b. Fi'li 
c. Taqriri 
42 Islamic Studies
Qawli Hadith 
Each and every message uttered by the holy Prophet (Sm) is called 'Qawli Hadith' 
or 'message-based' Hadith. 
Fi'li Hadith 
The activities of the great Prophet (Sm) as a Rasul are called Fi'li or 'activitybased' 
Hadith. 
Taqriri Hadith 
The Taqriri or agreement-based Hadith includes what the Sahabis (the followers) 
used to say about Shariat and do in presence of the great Prophet (Sm) who did not 
oppose them, rather gave his agreement to them by keeping silent. 
In view of the Sanad or Rabee (Hadith describers) Hadith can be divided into three 
types. 
Asa. 
Marfoo 
b. Mawqoof 
c. Maqtu 
Marfoo Hadith 
Marfoo Hadiths are those whose sources of descriptions reached upto Rasulullah (Sm). 
Mawqoof Hadith 
Mawqoof Hadiths are those whose sources of description could be traced upto the 
Sahabis (the followers). 
Maqtu' Hadith 
Maqtu' Hadiths are those whose sources of description could be traced upto the 
Tabieen (i.e. their speeches, activities or approval). And there is another kind of 
Hadith which is called 'Hadith-e-Qudsi'. The basic fact about this type of Hadith was 
received from Allah by the holy Prophet (Sm) and afterwards he informed his ummats 
of this in his own language. 
Sanad 
The description of Hadiths from individual to individual is called 'Sanad'. And the 
persons who have described the Hadiths are called the 'Rabee'. 
Islamic Studies 43
Matan 
The gist or the main message of Hadith is called 'Matan'. 
Preservation and Compilation of Hadiths: 
Generally, the writing of Hadith during the life-time of Rasulullah (Sm) was 
prohibited. Because, if the Hadith was written down at that time, there might have 
been a risk of mixing the Hadith with the Qur'an. The people of Arabia had strong 
memory. Encouraging them to memorize the Hadith the holy Prophet (Sm) said, "The 
person who will listen to my Hadith, preserve it and disseminate it to others in the 
same way as he/she had listened will be fortunate." The Sahabis (the followers) 
memorised the Hadith and conveyed them to others. During the reign of Khulafa-e- 
Rashedin and Bani Umayyad, the Hadith of Rasul (Sm) was thus memorised and 
preserved for a long time. But the letters, contracts, charters etc. of Rasulullah (Sm) 
were preserved in the written form. Moreover, a good number of Sahabis had written 
many Hadiths of Rasulullah (Sm) on their personal initiative. In this regard, "Saheefa- 
As-Sadika" of Abdullah Ibn Amar Ibn Aas (R) consisting of five hundred Hadiths is 
specially mentionable. At the beginning of Hizri 100, the famous Umayyad Caliph 
Umar Ibn Abdul Aziz (R) gave orders for writing down the Hadith at the official level. 
The first exclusive collection of Hadith is Imam Malik's (R) 'Muwatya'. The third 
century of Hizri is the golden period of compilation of Hadith. Six exclusive books on 
Hadith were compiled during that period. Taken together, these are called Sihah Sittah 
or six exclusive books of Hadith. These books and collections of Hadiths are named 
as follows: 
1. Sahih Bukhari -Imam Muhammad Ibn Ismail (R) 
2. Sahih Muslim -Imam Muslim-Ibn Hajjaj (R) 
3. Sunane Nasai -Abdur Rahman-Ibn Shuaib (R) 
4. Sunane Abu Dawud -Imam Abu Dawud (R) and Sulaiman Ibn Ashas (R) 
5. Jame Tirmiji -Imam I'sa Muhammad Ibn I'sa Tirmiji (R) 
6. Sunane Ibn Majah -Imam Abu Abdullah Ibn Yazid Majah (R) 
Importance and Necessity 
Allah, the Merciful, has described all the orders, restrictions, principles, rules and 
regulations of Islamic Shariat in the Qur'an Majid. The directions, basic rules and 
instructions of Shariat have been described very briefly in it. The great Prophet (Sm) 
used to give necessary explanations to implement these short directions and 
instructions. These explanations and analyses made by the Prophet (Sm) are Hadith. 
For example, orders to establish Salat (prayers) have been given in the Qur'an Majid. 
44 Islamic Studies
But detailed descriptions as to how many times a day we are required to perform, how 
many Rakats are to be performed at each time and how to perform in each Rakat are 
not given in the Holy Qur'an. In the same way, the matter of Zakat is told in the Holy 
Qur'an. But in it no mention has been made as to the quantity of Zakat to be given. 
The descriptions of the rules and regulations given by the great Prophet (Sm) as per 
the desire of Allah are the Hadiths. This is why, the importance of the Hadith is as 
great as that of the Qur'an. Allah, says in this regard: 
Meaning: "Accept those that the Rasul (Sm) gives you and keep away from those 
that he prohibits" (Sura Hashar: 7) 
The great Prophet (Sm) himself hinting at the necessity of the Hadith, said: 
Meaning: "I am leaving two things amongst you. As long as you hold these two 
things tight, you will not lose your way one is Allah's Kitab (Qur'an) and the other 
is the 'Sunnah' of Allah's Rasul (Sm)" (Mashkat). 
As each and every Ayat and direction of the Qur'an gives light to human beings 
leading them towards the right way, in the same way, the Hadith of Rasul (Sm) leads 
the entire mankind towards the path of justice, truth and peace. As the Qur'an is ever 
true, so is Hadith. In this connection, it is declared in the Qur'an Majid: 
Meaning: "You say, do as Allah and His (Allah's) Rasul say. If you do not do so, 
then know that Allah does not like the Kafirs" (Sura Ale-Imran: 32) 
The great Prophet (Sm), in his speech on the occasion of his last Hajj 
(pilgrimage), directed the Muslim Ummah and said, "It is the duty of those who are 
present here to convey my message to others who are not present today". (Bukhari). 
It is proved in the context of the above discussion that the importance and 
necessity of the Propthet's (Sm) Hadiths in the life of mankind is unlimited. 
The Ten Hadiths of the Great Prophet (Sm) 
Hadith No. 1. 
Word - Meaning: 
- Surely - activities 
- intention 
Islamic Studies 45
Meaning: "Surely (the results of) all activities are dependent on the intentions." 
(Bakhari). 
Teachings: 
There is at least some purpose behind every action of a man. Nobody does any 
activity without any purpose. We can learn about the nature of the purposes or 
objectives of our action from this Hadith. The success of an action depends on Niyyat 
(the intention). Honest intentions bring good results. No good can be achieved from 
any action if the intentions are not good. For example, it is described in the latter part 
of this Hadith that a person gets the pleasure of Allah and His Rasul (Sm) if he/she 
goes on Hizrat (travels) for the pleasure of Allah and Allah's Rasul (Sm). And if a 
person travels for having any worldly material gain or for marrying any woman, he 
will get exactly that. For example, a woman named Umme Qais accepted Islam and 
travelled to Madina. Then an unknown person travelled to Madina with the intention 
of marrying that woman. Hearing this news, the great Prophet (Sm) narrated this 
important Hadith. 
One can get Sawab (virtue) whenever one intends to do some good work. 
Importance of this Niyyat (intention) leads to deciding of Jannat (heaven) for the 
Mumins and Jahannam (Hell) for the Kafirs. 
Hadith No. 2. 
46 Islamic Studies 
established 
above, on 
evidence 
except, but 
servant, one who is loyal to 
anyone 
- Islam 
- Perform 
to establish, establishing 
that 
there is no Illah (Lord) 
of course, certainly, surely 
this servant/slave. 
- five
Meaning: "Islam is based on five pillars: to give evidence that there is no Illah 
(Lord) but Allah and Muhammad (Sm) is Allah's Rasul, to establish Salat (namz), 
to give Zakat, to perform Hajj (the pilgrimage) and to fast during the month of 
Ramadan." (Bukhari and Muslim). 
Teachings: 
The great Prophet (Sm) mentioned the fundamentals of Islam in this Hadith. 
Islam does not become complete without the coordination of these five aspects. Faith 
in Allah & Rasul (Sm) is one of these five pillars. In this Hadith Islam has been 
compared with a tent made of five pillars. The pillar in the middle of the tent is very 
important. This pillar is the faith in Allah and Rasul (Sm). The other pillars of the tent 
are also very essential. A tent remains standing when all these pillars are present. For 
want of one, the others fall down. For want of the middle pillar, the entire tent 
collapses. Therefore, to become a perfect Muslim, coordination of these five things 
within oneself is essential. In this Hadith all kinds of physical iba'dat (worships) are 
hinted at by mentioning Salat (namaz) and 'Saum' (fasting). And Salat is such an 
iba'dat that it prevents a man from all sorts of vulgarity and unfair activities. Salat is a 
pillar of deen (religion). Saum is a physical iba'dat which is done for expressing 
allegiance to Allah only. There is no possibility of any 'Ria' (display) in it. Zakat is the 
kind of iba'dat performed by distributing and sharing one's wealth and expressing 
one's gratitude to Allah. Hajj is the kind of iba'dat which one can perform if one has 
physical as well as financial ability. 
Therefore, it is essential to express our gratitude to Allah Ta'la through our mouth, 
body and wealth. 
Hadith No. 3. 
Word-Meaning: 
Islamic Studies 47 
- the best 
- your (pronoun) 
- the person 
- has learnt 
- has taught
Meaning: The person who has learnt the Holy Qur'an himself and has taught 
others is the best amongst you. (Bukhari and Muslim) 
Teachings: 
The Qur'an Majid is the Kalam (message) of Allah, the Greatest. It is the source of 
all knowledge and science and Hedayat (rectificaiton). It is the proper guide to 
mankind and the preserver and carrier of human welfare in the earthly life and the life 
hereafter. We are required to learn and know how to acquire this invaluable wealth of 
the Holy Qur'an. In this Hadith, the learner of the Holy Qur'an has been mentioned as 
more honourable than any other learner because he/she has devoted himself/herself to 
acquiring knowledge of such a book in which there is no scope of any doubt. This 
book will improve his character and release him from greed and lust, jealousy and 
malice, and beastly behaviour. This will make him sympathetic towards the poor, the 
distressed and the helpless people. This will inspire him to struggle to eradicate 
injustice and oppression from society. In the same way, one who devotes oneself to 
teachings the Holy Qur'an is the best teacher in society. 
The analysis of history shows that the teachings of the Qur'an have heightened a 
nation which was drowned at the extreme bottom of darkness and brought them to the 
light of knowledge from the darkness of jaheliyyat (illiteracy). The people of this 
nation were once regarded as great teachers of the world. The darkness of Europe has 
been removed by the very light of the Qur'an. 
The Muslims can achieve greatness in the world even today by devoting 
themselves to the study, teaching and research of the Qur'an and by applying its (the 
Qur'an's) teachings in their own lives. Therefore, we will learn the Qur'an and devote 
ourselves to the task of teaching it.
Hadith No. 4. 
Word-meaning: 
- marks - Promise/pledge 
- hypocrite - break 
- three - placed in the custody 
- lie - misappropriate 
48 Islamic Studies
Forma-7, Islamic Studies-9 
Meaning: The marks or features of a hypocrite are three: he lies when he speaks, 
he breaks the promise that he makes and he misappropriates what is placed in his 
custody. (Bukhari &Muslim) 
Teachings 
The character of the hypocrites has been exposed in this Hadith. Three terrible 
shortcomings are seen in their character: 
1. He lies whenever he speaks. 
2. He breaks the promise that he makes. 
3. He misappropriates what is placed in his custody. 
These three activities are very detestable and condemnable. For example, a lie is 
the root of all evils. Lies destroy a man. Liars are hated in society. 
Breaking promises is a dangerous fault. The person who breaks promises can 
never achieve success in any work. He/she faces big problems in business and 
commerce, transactions etc. The great Prophet (Sm) says in a Hadith: "The person 
who does not keep his promise, is not religious at all". Breaking promises is a 
seriously heinous act. Nobody has any respect for the person who is engaged in such 
activity. The holy Prophet (Sm) said: "The person who does not maintain trust, has no 
(perfect) Iman." The speech, activity and intention of a hypocrite have been hinted at 
by mentioning these three traits of him. If co-ordination of these three traits takes 
place in a person, he/she becomes a munafiq (real hypocrite). He/she will have to face 
serious consequences. He/she will be thrown into the lowest stage of hell. Therefore, 
we will always save ourselves from munafiq (hypocricy) 
Hadith No. 5. 
Islamic Studies 49 
- plant, tree 
- cultivate grow 
- eat 
- birds 
- human beings 
- four-footed animal, 
quadruped 
- alms, gift
Meaning : If a Muslim plants a tree or grows crops and if a bird or a man or a 
four-footed animal eats that, it will be regarded as the alms or gift on behalf of him. 
(Bukhari & Muslim). 
Teachings: 
This Hadith of the great Prophet (Sm) is an epoch making Hadith in the field of 
socio-economic development of human society. In this Hadith the great Prophet (Sm) 
has encouraged us for planting trees and farming because these two are the most 
essential things for all human beings. Food, clothing and shelter are the basic needs of 
human beings. For all these things, human beings in one way or another depend on 
tree-plantation and cultivation of agricultural fields. 
This Hadith has taught us that plantation of trees is a pious and virtuous act. It is 
not a matter of shame. In the same way, producing crops is a virtuous work. Whoever 
is benefited by this, the labour of the labourers does not go in vain. Rather, he acquires 
Sawab (virtue) in exchange of this. We will plant more trees, take care of them and try 
to produce more crops in the fields.
Hadith No. 6 
Wrod-meaning: 
Meaning: "All the created beings are dear to Allah. Therefore, he who graces the 
created beings of Allah, is the dearest one to Him." 
50 Islamic Studies 
- makhluq, the entire creation 
- family members, near and dear ones 
- the dearest 
- who 
- has helped graced 
- to, at
Teachings: 
The whole universe is like Allah's family. Allah rears all and provides for all. Allah 
has not made all creations equal. This is a test of Allah. Amongst the members of 
Allah's family, the person who is kind to all creations is dearer to Allah. Human beings, 
animals, livestock and birds are all Allah's creation. This Hadith inspires us to be kind 
to all the creations of Allah. Allah graces the person who graces Allah's creation. 
Human beings is the best of all the created beings, i.e. Ashraful Makhluqat. For 
this reason, they have to be kind to other living beings. Kindness to creatures is in fact 
a great virtue also. Therefore, we have to be kind to all the living things and beings of 
this universe. 
Hadith No. 7. 
Meaning: Help your brother, even if he is an oppressor or an oppressed. If he is an 
oppressor, try to prevent him from oppressing others. And if he is an oppressed, help 
him (save him from the cruelty of the oppressor). 
Teachings: 
In this Hadith, Rasulullah (Sm) has directed us to help both the oppressor and the 
oppressed. He termed both the oppressor and the oppressed as brothers of Muslims. It 
is a duty of a Muslim to save his brother from danger. When a 'Mazlum' (an innocent 
helpless victim) or an oppressed person is a victim to oppression, his brother can 
never keep quiet and sit idle. He must oppose and resist it because a Muslim nation is 
a just nation. They have been created to establish justice with all their might, ability 
and strength when any unjust or hateful incident takes place in society. For this, he has 
to struggle and fight it out, if necessary. 
Islamic Studies 51 
- to help/ save 
- prevent him 
- if 
- oppessor 
- oppressed 
- your brother 
- help him/ save him 
- he is
We have a responsibility even towards the person who is an oppressor because he 
is our brother. Rather his character needs to be rectified. The Prophets (Nabi-Rasuls) 
and the great men have thus eradicated oppression from society and transformed the 
oppressor into a good person. Therefore, we will try to rectify the oppressors, 
terrorists and the bad people in our society and come forward to helping the oppressed 
and helpless persons. 
Hadith No. 8 
Word meaning: 
Meaning: A Muslim is the brother of another Muslim. He can neither oppress him 
nor hand him over to the enemy. Allah fulfils the need of the person who tries to 
fulfil the need of his Muslim brother. (Bukhari and Muslim). 
Teachings: 
Muslims are brothers of one another. Islam directs that one will help the other in 
times of danger and difficulty, save his prestige, honour, life and property, can never 
oppress the other Muslim brother and hand him over to his enemy. The great Prophet 
(Sm) says in this regard: "The virtuous people (owners of Iman) are like a single 
body in mutual kindness, love and sympathy. The whole body becomes sick if any 
part of it is sick." It is essential on the part of a Muslim to respond to the call of his 
other Muslim brother to fulfil his need. Therefore, we will always devote ourselves to 
the service of humanity. 
Hadith No. 9. 
Word-meaning: 
52 Islamic Studies 
- brother 
- does not hand over 
- does not oppress 
- Necessity 
- businessman, trader 
- truthful 
- faithful 
- martyr
Meaning: The faithful and truthful Muslim traders will accompany the martyrs in 
the day of judgement (Qiamat) (Hakim's Mustadrik). 
Teachings: 
Trade and commerce is a holy profession. The main aim of the person involved in 
this profession is to serve the people, to place the essential commodities at the doorsteps 
of the people and to ensure the arrangement of collection and proper distribution 
of commodities. If the trader is honest and truthful, only then the aims and objectives 
of this trade and commerce may be achieved. And if the trader is dishonest, the basic 
aim of business will be destroyed and people will be cheated at every step. For this 
reason, the great Prophet (Sm) mentioned the rare status of the Muslim traders who 
are honest, just and truthful and said: "They would remain with the martyrs on the 
day of judgement." The martyr acquires the rare status of Shahadat (martyrdom) by 
letting the fresh blood of his chest flow on to the path of Allah. To do business with 
honesty and justice in the age of dishonesty and cheating is equivalent to Jiha'd. And 
to fight against the instincts is the best Jiha'd. It is very difficult to carry out business 
and trade with honesty and faithfulness basing on Islam in an atmosphere of interestbased 
business and transactions. A Muslim business man can only participate in the 
struggle against this unfavourable atmosphere. And Allah will then offer him/her, in 
exchange of it, the rare status of Shahadat (martyrdom) in Akhirat ( hereafter). 
Therefore, we will be honest in trade and commerce. 
Hadith No. 10. 
Word-meaning: 
Islamic Studies 53 
- two sentences 
- easy 
- tongue, mouth 
- difficult, heavy 
- dear 
- everking, merciful
Meaning: There are two sentences which are very dear to Allah. These are very 
easy to pronounce, but very heavy on the weighing scales. The two sentences are: 
'Subhanallahi wa -bihamdihi, 'Subhanallahil-Azim.' "Praises be to Allah, the 
Holiest. Allah, the Holiest, is the evergreatest." 
Teachings: 
In this Hadith two sentences are mentioned, whose Zikir (recitation) is very dear 
to Allah. Also they are easy for people to read and people can acquire much Sawab 
(virtues) by uttering them. 
Allah Ta'ala is free from all errors and omissions. He has no want. Allah is not 
dependant on anybody. This vast world is the creation of Allah. Allah has no partner in 
the matter of creation. When we look at the vast sky and the earth, the saying 
'Subhaballahi-wa-bihamdihi' spontaneously comes out of our hearts. Allah is the 
Holiest and all the praises be to Allah. 
Allah is the protector of the whole world. We live under the endless kindness and 
grace of Allah. Everything in this world is for Allah's praise; Allah is Great. With this 
realization we ought to utter 'Subhanallahil Azim' - Allah, the Holiest; Allah is the 
ever greatest. Therefore, through these two holy Kalimah (sentences) we will always 
remember Allah and the scale of our virtue will be heavier in the world hereafter. 
Ijma 
'Ijma' is the third source of islamic Shariat. Its place is immediately after the Qur'an 
and the Sunnah. The dictionary meaning of Ijma is 'Ittifaq' or consensus. In the Islamic 
language, maintaining of consensus on a subject of Shariat by the pious researchers 
(Mujtahids) of the Muslim Ummah of the same period is called Ijma. Asserting 'Ijma' 
as a document and source of Shariat, the holy Prophet (Sm) said: "What the Muslims 
think to be good is also good to Allah". He further said: "My followers (Ummat) will 
not agree on any wrong issue." A lot of issues were settled among the Sahabis (the 
followers) by 'Ijma' or agreement just after the death of the great Prophet (Sm). 'Ijma' 
is hinted at in different Ayats of the Holy Qur'an. Allah says: 
Meaning: "And I have made you the moderate Ummats so that you can be the 
witnesses for human beings." Here the followers of Muhammad (Sm) have been 
called the followers of 'middle path' or the just followers. Therefore, their 'Ijma' is a 
document. 
54 Islamic Studies
The origin of Ijma 
The Muslim society was never inert, inactive and stagnant. This society was 
always dynamic. During the life - time of the great Prophet (Sm) such issues arose 
the soluation to which were not found in the Qur'an directly. Then he would solve 
them by cosulting with the distinguished Sahabis. After his death, in the ages of 
Khulafa-e-Rashideen if there were any such issues as having no solutions in the 
Qur'an and the Sunnah, they (Khalafa-e-Rashideen) would solve them after taking 
opinions of the chief Sahabis (followers). During the period of Hazrat Umar (R) 
consensus of the Sahabis on many issues was established. For example, by 'Ijma' of 
the Sahabis, the practice of twenty Rakats of Salatut Tarabih in congregation on the 
nights of the month of Ramadan was introduced at that time. New issues were solved 
in the same way during the period of the Tabiyee too. 
The order about Ijma 
Ijma is an unchallenging document relating to the issues of Shariat. Ijma cannot 
be opposed in anyway. 
Qiyas 
Introduction 
The world is ever changing. New questions arise with the changing circumstances 
of the world, new issues are being created and different complexities are cropping up. 
Islam is capable of facing these problems and answering the questions arising in 
all times. This is because Islam is a dynamic system of life. Apart from this, Allah, the 
Creator of this universe, is the Maker of laws of Islamic Shariat. Allah is quite aware 
of the present and future of human beings. So the basic ideas of Shariat have been 
presented in the Qur'an and the Hadith in such a way that the future problems can be 
solved in the light of these ideas. And this is what Qiyas is. 
As a document of Shariat the status of Qiyas is next to that of Ijma'. Qiyas is the 
fourth source of Islamic laws. The dictionary meaning of the term 'Qiyas' is to 
measure, infer and compare. In the terminology of Shariat, Qiyas is to apply the 
previous rules to solve the problems that crop up, in the light of the previous 
decisions. Allah Ta'ala says in this regard in the Holy Qur'an: 
Islamic Studies 55
Meaning: "O wise people, learn through your deep thought and wisdom." (Sura 
Hashar - 2) Allah, the great, has directed (the thinkers) to do 'Qiyas' or measure some 
objects with other equivalent objects in this Ayat. Qiyas is only applicable to the cases 
where direct solutions in the Qur'an or Sunnah or Ijma' are not available. Here is an 
example: When Rasulullah (Sm) sent Muaz Ibn-Jabal (R) to Yemen as 'Qazi' (judge), 
the Prophet (Sm) asked him: "How will you take decisions when any problem will 
arise?" He answered: "According to the holy book of Allah." Rasulullah (Sm) said: 
"And if you don't find it there?" He replied: "According to the Sunnah of the 
Prophet (Sm)." He again asked: "If you do not find it there too?". He then replied 
that he would decide by using his own conscience and intelligence. Then Rasulullah 
(Sm) said, "All the praises be to Allah Who made him reply in" such words through 
His messenger as His Rasul (Sm) was pleased. The Sahabis (the followers) of 
Rasulullah(Sm) used to do Qiyas and solve the newly cropped-up problems in the 
light of the Qur'an and Sunnah. The Imams used to apply Qiyas in the light of the 
following principles: 
(a) Qiyas will not be applicable in those cases about which solutions are available in 
the Qur'an, Hadith and Ijma. 
(b) Qiyas would not go against the Qur'an, Hadith and Ijma. 
(c) Formulation of any rule against the basic rules introduced through the Qur'an, 
Hadith and Ijma is outside the domain of Qiyas. 
(d) The basic principles of Qiyas should be within the limit of human knowledge. 
The Terminology of Shariat 
All subjects have some of their own terminologies. Islamic Shariat has also its 
own terminologies. It is possible to realize the phase wise importance of the rules and 
regulations of Islamic Shariat through these terminologies. 
Farz
There are certain rules of Shariat which must be obeyed. To discard those with 
negligence is an act of faithlessness. And if these are not performed by one out of 
idleness, one will be strongly punished. Rules and regulations of this kind are called 
'Farz'. 
Wajib 
There are certain rules of Shariat which everybody ought to follow. There is 
provision for punishment in the case of breaking these laws. Rules of this kind are 
called 'Wajib'. 
56 Islamic Studies
Forma-8, Islamic Studies-9 
Sunnat 
There are some acts which the great Prophet (Sm) himself performed and 
instructed his Ummats (the followers) to perform. Provision of punishment is also 
there for not performing them. Besides these, there are some acts which were done by 
the Prophet (Sm) but he did not insist his Ummats on doing so. Both of these acts are 
known as the Prophet's Sunnat. 
Mustahab 
Those good activities are Mustahab which Rasulullah (Sm) inspired his Ummats 
to perform. 
We have come to know from this discussion that the terminologies of Shariat are 
four, i.e. (a) Farz (b) Wajib (c) Sunnah and (d) Mustahab. We will now discuss these 
terminologies in detail. 
Farz
The activities which according to the documents of the Qur'an and the Sunnah 
must be performed and not subject to violation, are called Farz. The Farz activities can 
not be discarded in any way. It is a great sin not to perform the 'Farz' activities, and the 
person who refuses to do so is a Kafir. 
Farz is of two kinds: (1) Farz-e-A'in and (2) Farz-e-Kifaya. The Farz activities 
which each Muslim has to perform individually are called Farz-e-A'in. Farz-e-A'in 
can not be left without any reasonable cause as per Shariat. For example, to establish 
salat five times a day, to observe 'Saum' (keep fasting) during the month of Ramadan, 
to pay Zakat, to perform Hajj (the pilgrimage) once in a life - time on the part of a 
wealthy and healthy person etc. It is a serious sin not to perform the Farz-e-A'in. 
If some Muslims in society perform an act which is obligatory (Farz) on all the 
Muslims, the rest are not liable for it. Activities of this kind are called 'Farz-e-Kefaya, 
e.g. the Salatul Janaza, Jiha'd etc. 
Wajib 
Wajib is near to Farz and must be obeyed. It is not proved by the absolute 
document or the Qur'an. As wajib is near to Farz, it must be performed. If anybody 
does not obey Wajib, he/she will not be a Kafir, but it will be a serious sin. It is 
essential to perform 'Sijdah Sahu' in the case of giving-up the Wajib activities in salat, 
otherwise, it is Wajib to perform again. It is Wajib to say Eidul Fitr, Eidul-Adha and 
Salatul Witr. 
Islamic Studies 57
Sunnat 
The activities which ought to be performed by the Muslims as directed by the 
great Prophet (Sm) and his Sahabis (the followers) are called Sunnat. Sunnat is of two 
kinds: (1) Sunnat-e-Muakkada and (2) Sunnat-e-Zaida or Gair Muakkada. 
The kinds of iba'dat (worship) which the great Prophet (Sm) always used to 
perform by himself and insisted others on performing these are called Sunnat-e- 
Muakkada. Since it is near to Wajib it should be performed. It is a sin to give up 
Sunnat-e-Muakkada without any reason. To say salat of two Rakat of Sunnat before 
Farz of Fajr prayer, four Rakats before Farz of Zuhr prayer and two Rakats after it, two 
Rakats after Farz of Magrib and Isha prayers all are Sunnat-e-Muakkada. Azan (the 
call for prayer) and Iqamat are also Sunnat-e-Muakkada. 
The activities which the great Prophet (Sm) sometimes would perform and 
sometimes gave up and did not insist on doing these are called Sunnat-e-Gair 
Muakkada. For example, to say prayer of four Rakats of Sunnat before Farz of A'sr 
and Isha prayer is termed Sunnat-e-Gair Muakkada. 
Mustahab 
Rasulullah (Sm) has inspired his Ummat to perform some activities. It is a virtue 
to perform these activities but there is no sin for not performing them. These activities 
are called Mustahab. The kinds of iba'dat in addition to Farz, Wajib and Sunnat are 
regarded as Mustahab. Mustahab is also known as 'Nafal' or Mandoob'. 
Halal and Haram 
The world is a laboratory for a human being. His/her stay here is for a short while. 
And Akhirat is the permanent living place for him/her. That life is permanent. In order 
to test human beings in this temporal world, Allah has made some objects 'haram' and 
some 'halal' for them. For example, for a male to use gold and wear garments made of 
silk got from the silkworm are Haram (prohibited). Shariat has made those objects 
halal (legal) which are beneficial and delicious for human beings, and has made those 
objects haram (prohibited) which are harmful to them. 
Halal 
'Halal' means legitimate or legal. Those matters whose legality is proved clearly by 
the Qur'an and the Hadith are called 'halal'. The activities or items of food in which no 
disobedience to Allah is seen and by which the right of others is not harmed are 
considered to be 'halal'. 'Halal' is opposite to 'haram'. 'Haram' is avoidable as 'halal' is 
acceptable. The activities or objects whose proof of being halal is available in the 
document of the Qur'an and Hadith are called 'halal Bayyin' or clear halal. For example, 
58 Islamic Studies
to carry out trade and business and to make transactions in the ways directed by Allah 
and Rasul (Sm), to eat the meat of halal animals, etc. are halal Bayyin (clean halal). 
Haram 
The activities and objects which are prohibited by the clear instructions of the Qur'an 
and Sunnah and which are definitely avoidable and worth giving up are called haram. 
It is a serious sin to do haram things knowingly. And to regard haram as halal or halal 
as haram is Kufr. The halal objects are innumerable. It is not possible to make a list 
of them. Allah, the Merciful, says: 
Meaning: "If you count the Niamat (gifts) of Allah, you cannot finish counting 
them" (Sura Ibrahim : 34) 
The number of haram objects is limited. For this reason, a list of certain haram 
objects is given below: 
(1) It is haram to eat the meat of dead animals, but to eat dead fish is halal. 
(2) The blood which flows after an animal is slaughtered is haram, but the blood 
which remains with the meat of the halal animals is not haram. 
(3) To eat pork is haram. 
(4) To eat human flesh is haram. 
(5) To eat the meat of animals which are sacrificed in the names of gods and 
goddesses is haram. 
(6) To eat the meat of the halal animals killed by strangulation, chopping, throwing 
down from high places or killed by a blunt weapon is haram. Blood does not flow 
in this way and this is absolute cruelty. 
(7) The meat of ferocious animals, e.g. the lion, the tiger, the bear, the fox, the dog 
etc. and of ferocious birds, e.g. the hawk, the kite etc. is haram. 
(8) The animals which are generally unholy and live on dead animals are also haram, 
e.g. the crow, the vulture etc. 
(9) The animals which are troublesome, poisonous and harmful are also haram, e.g. 
the snake, the scorpion etc. 
(10) The meat of the donkey, the mule and the elephant is haram. 
(11) The objects which cause defects in the brain and intoxication are haram to take or 
drink, e.g. heroin, wine, opium, etc. and all other drugs. 
Islamic Studies 59
The influence of halal and haram in the human life 
Allah has created mankind as the best of all creations (Ashraful Makhluqat). And He 
has employed all the things of the world for the welfare of human beings. For 
example, Allah says: 
Meaning: "Allah has created everything of this world for your service." (Sura 
Baqara: 29) 
Allah knows which objects of this world are helpful for their bodies, minds, brains 
and souls and which objects are unhelpful, which objects are useful and which objects 
are harmful to them. So Allah has made those things halal which benefit human 
beings and keep their bodies and minds healthy. Halal food brings light to the heart 
and grows a sense of hatred towards injustice and dishonest people and increases good 
qualities in human beings. If you eat halal food, your attention to iba'dat will enhance. 
And that is why, inspiring the prophets to eat halal food, Allah says: "O holy 
Prophets, eat halal things and perform good deeds. I am well aware of what you 
do." (Mumin: 51) Addresing all human beings, Allah the Holiest, says: 
Meaning: "O human beings, eat the halal and good things of this world." (Sura 
Baqara: 168) 
Haram 
Haram food, drinks and objects must be avoided. There are such elements in 
certain items of food and drink as can cause abnormality in healthy brains, create 
madness and help diminish memory, e.g. heroin, wine, opium, ganja, etc. These things 
harm human bodies severely, damage social atmosphare and cripple human beings 
economically. These bad habits make men bankrupt. Gambling, housey, lottery are 
haram in the eye of Shariat. These are profane and satanic acts. A man loses 
everything if he is involved in these acts. Allah says in this regard: 
Meaning: "O pious people, drinking wine, gambling, worshipping images etc. are 
the evil acts of devils. Therefore, keep away from these things so that you can 
achieve welfare." (Sura Mayida: 90) 
60 Islamic Studies
Modern scientific researches have proved that there are such germs in the bodies 
of wild animals that are harmful to human bodies. So those can not be halal for us. 
Moreover, eating haram food develops bad habits and bad character, destroys interest 
in iba'dat and the prayers of the haram-eaters are not accepted. The Prophet (Sm) said 
in this regard. "Many people come back from long journeys and start praying with 
devotion raising both the hands to Allah saying: O Lord of the universe! But how 
their prayers will be accepted since their food and drinks, dress and clothing are all 
of haram earnings?" (Muslim, Tirmizi) 
Exercise 
Multiple Choice Questions 
1. "After performing Salat you spread on the earth." Part of which Sura is this 
translation? 
a. Sura Bani Israil b. Sura Ale Imran 
c. Sura Jumua d. Sura Mumenun 
2. What does 'La Tanher' mean ? 
a. do not be rude b. do not threat 
c. do not forbid d. do not give shelter 
3. Who did Hazrat Abu Bakr (R) give the responsibility of writing down the Qur'an 
in the form of a book? 
a. Hazrat Usman (R) b. Hazrat Zaid Ibn Sabit (R) 
c. Hazrat Ibn Abbas (R) d. Hazrat Abdullah Ibn Masud (R) 
4. The approval of Qiyas as a source of Islamic Shariya proves that Islam is - 
a. dynamic b. universal 
c. unbiased d. well-controlled 
5. Jahangir gave false evidence for his relative- in the court. According to the 
Shariya, it is - 
a. Halal b. Haram 
c. Makruh d. Mustahab 
6. As the result of the recitation of the Qur'an - 
i. difference between truth and false can be understood 
ii. political trends can be known 
iii. the right path of life can be known 
Islamic Studies 61
Which of the following answers is correct? 
a. i b. ii 
c. i & ii d. i & iii 
Read the following passage and answer questions no. 7 and 8 according to it. 
Arif takes drug. He is forbidden but he does not pay heed to it. For this reason, he is 
beaten. The matter is brought to the knowledge of religious teacher. Then he says, 
"Taking drug is Haram." Finding no other alternative, it is decided that he should be 
sent to a rectification center. 
7. On the basis of which one, the religious teacher says that taking drug is Haram? 
a. Qur'an b. Hadith 
c. Ijma d. Qiyas 
8. For stopping Arif's taking drug - 
i. He has to be kept in a disciplined new environment 
ii. He should be sympathised by the family 
iii. He has to take his parent's permission in selecting friends 
Which of the following answers is correct? 
a. i b. ii 
c. i & ii d. ii & iii 
Creative Questions 
1. Sajeeb and Sayeed are two brothers. Both of them perform Salat regularly. But 
Sayeed can not recite the Holy Qur'an correctly. Sayeed expressed his eagerness 
to learn the recitation of the Qur'an. Then Sajeeb said, "It is obligatory to recite 
the Qur'an correctly in Salat and recitation of the Qur'an is the best Ibadat." 
a. What is Tilawat? 
b. Explain the necessity of recitation of the Holy Qur'an correctly in Salat. 
c. What attempts should Sayeed take for learning recitation of the Holy Qur'an correctly? 
d. "Recitation of the Qur'an is the best Ibadat" -Analyse. 
62 Islamic Studies
2. Mr. Ahdul Hoque is an Alim (Islamic scholar). Abu Bakar, his son, asked him, 
"Father! Can I surrender, myself completely in Islam, if I lead my life according 
to the meaning of the Holy Qur'an only? He replied, "Yes, you can. But you have 
to abide by the instructions of the Holy Qur'an following the Sunnah of the Rasul 
(Sm). Because Sunnah of the Rasul (Sm) is the explanation of the Holy Qur'an. 
After it when he wanted to learn whether he has to follow any other thing. In 
reply Mr. Abdul Hoque said. "Yes, you have to learn about Ijma and Qiyas." 
a. What is ljma? 
b. What is meant by Sunnah of the Rasul (Sm) ? 
c. How important are Ijma and Qiyas in the life of Abu Bakar? Explain. 
d. Analyse the role of the Qur'an and the Hadith to follow them in his life of Abu 
Bakar. 
3. Arif wanted to know from Rafique, his neighbour, why is eating dead fish Halal 
but dead hen Haram? Rafique could not give any correct answer. So, they went to 
an Alim (Islamic scholar) and asked about it. The Alim explained the matter and 
they understood. They came to understand. 
a. What does the term 'Halal' mean? 
b. What is meant by 'Haram' in the terminology of Shariya? 
c. How will Arif explain 'Haram' by making a list of three Haram things ? 
d. "Halal food and Halal earning are pre-conditions for accepting Ibadat to the 
Almighty Allah ."Analyse. 
Islamic Studies 63